   Scroll To Top

Five Ways Nostalgia Can Improve Your Well-Being

Some recent studies suggest that experiencing nostalgia about our past can
make us happier and more resilient during times of stress.

--
   me a bittersweet feeling—a mixture of joy, sadness, and longing.

   While I find nostalgia pleasant overall and even inspiring, doctors and
   psychologists did not always consider it a good thing. Staying “stuck
   in the past” was often associated with being unable to adjust to new
   realities, like when soldiers were nostalgic for their faraway homes
   and experienced loneliness and dread. Not that long ago, some
   considered nostalgia to be a mental illness, akin to melancholy, which
   could lead to anxiety, depression, and sleep disorders.

   But more recent findings on nostalgia suggest it can be good for us,
   increasing our well-being, making us feel connected to other people,
   and giving us a sense of continuity in our lives. And it seems to come
   on naturally when we need to weather life’s difficulties. Rather than
   being a problem, nostalgia can help bring happiness and meaning to our
   lives.

--
   well-being.

   Here are some of the ways nostalgia can benefit us, according to
   science.

Nostalgia makes us feel socially connected

   Nostalgia about our past often includes recalling important people in
   our lives—people who cared about us and made us feel like we belonged.
   Certainly, my own nostalgic musings are centered around times when I
--
   with older adults—they felt less prejudice toward that group.

   Nostalgia also seems to help us maintain our relationships. For
   example, one study found that inducing nostalgia helped people feel
   more optimistic about relationships in general and more willing to
   connect with friends. Another study found that when induced to feel
   nostalgia, people (especially those who find connecting with others
   easier) felt more able to offer emotional support to the people in
   their lives.

Nostalgia helps us find meaning in life

   A sense of meaning in life involves knowing that your existence matters
--
   strive for in one way or another.

   Fortunately, research suggests nostalgia can be an important resource
   for increasing meaning, by highlighting central moments in our lives
   and giving us a sense of continuity.

   In one study, researchers compared nostalgia to two seemingly related
   forms of thinking about one’s life: recalling a positive past event or
   imagining a desired future. Focusing on an event that made them
--
   So take a moment to ponder the following question: In the grand scheme
   of things, how significant are you?”—they naturally turned to feelings
   of nostalgia for relief from that sense of meaninglessness.

   These findings and others suggest that nostalgia not only heightens
   your sense of meaning in life, but can act as a buffer when you
   experience a loss of meaning. And it may help you move forward in life,
   too. As one study found, nostalgia can increase your motivation to
   pursue important life goals, because it increases meaning—not just
   because it puts you in a better mood.

Nostalgia can make us happier

   Though it does seem to do just that—to boost our mood. Even though
   nostalgia is by definition a blend of positive and negative emotion,
   the positive tends to outweigh the negative, meaning we feel happier
   overall.

   In one very recent study, 176 university students were randomly
   assigned to a six-week nostalgia program where they were asked weekly
   to write about a past event that brought on “a sentimental longing for
   the past” (while a control group wrote about past events that were
--
       Try It Now

   The researchers found that nostalgia was generally beneficial, leading
   people to experience more positive emotions, life satisfaction, and
   well-being, as well as fewer negative emotions—at least three weeks
   into the program. These benefits mostly disappeared after that—except
   for people who started the experiment already engaging in nostalgia
   regularly. For them, going through the nostalgia program brought them
   greater life satisfaction and fewer negative emotions up to a month
   later, possibly because the program was a better fit for them.

   A lot of the benefits on happiness may be connected to nostalgia’s
   effects on social connection and meaning. But it could also be that
   nostalgia helps us see ourselves in a truer, more authentic light.

Nostalgia puts us in touch with our authentic selves

   When thinking nostalgically about our past, we are the prime
   protagonists in our own life stories. Perhaps because of this,
   nostalgia helps us to see our lives as continuous and coherent,
   providing us with a sense of authenticity.

--

   The researchers also studied how threats to one’s sense of self might
   make people engage in more nostalgia. Half of the participants read
   this text: “Many people feel that they have two sides to themselves.
   One side is the person that they show to other people; the other side
--
   participants wrote about their daily routines and when those routines
   were disrupted. Then, both groups reported on their positive and
   negative emotions, as well as feelings of nostalgia.

    Findings showed that people who focused on threats to their
   self-concept experienced more negative emotions, and in turn felt more
   nostalgic. This suggests that nostalgia helps put us in touch with our
   “real selves” and protects us against threats to our authenticity.

   Perhaps for this reason, engaging in nostalgia can lead to personal
   growth. At least one study found that feeling nostalgia made people
   feel more positively about themselves, which, in turn, made them more
   open to experiencing new things, expanding their horizons, and being
   curious—all signs of psychological health.

Nostalgia may help people who feel disillusioned or depressed

   Perhaps because of these potential benefits, people tend to engage in
   nostalgia when they are feeling down, lonely, or disillusioned. Many
   studies have found that nostalgia seems to protect people from negative
   mind states, bringing about a kind of emotional homeostasis.

   Of course, that doesn’t mean that nostalgia is always good or can’t
   have a downside. If nostalgia makes us spend too much time thinking
   about our past, it may prevent us from recognizing the joy in our lives
   right here and now. And, since we tend to engage in nostalgia when
   negative things occur, it could become an avoidance strategy that keeps
   us from dealing with present problems in more effective ways.

   Encouraging groups of people to feel nostalgic could also have negative
   consequences. For example, one study found that nostalgia made people
   more likely to believe political claims, regardless of their veracity.
   Inducing nostalgia could be an advertising ploy used to affect consumer
   behavior, which could lead to poor choices, too.

   Still, chances are that nostalgia is more a blessing than a curse, and
   a winning strategy for feeling better about ourselves. It can increase
   our connection to others, our sense of meaning in our lives, our
   authenticity, and our happiness. So, why not tune into nostalgia now
   and then? It may just help you meet the challenges of the moment.
