   (BUTTON)

Why do we need nostalgia?

   By Maria Cohut, Ph.D. on January 1, 2021

   Nostalgia and homesickness are part and parcel of the human experience.
   Most of us associate them with feelings of sadness and sometimes loss,
   but do they actually play a positive role in the human psyche? Medical
--
   Share on Pinterestkool99/Getty Images

   The term “nostalgia” originates from Ancient Greek via New Latin, and
   it is a composite of the root words “nostos,” meaning “home,” and
   “algos,” meaning “pain.”

   Essentially, it refers to the pain of being far away from home. The
   first time “nostalgia” came into use was in 17th-century Switzerland,
   when physician Johannes Hofer identified it as a condition specific to
   Swiss mercenary soldiers.

   Hofer identified nostalgia as a disease of the mind, and he described
   its mechanism as below:

     “Nostalgia […] is sympathic of an afflicted imagination. Hence, from
     the living spirits entirely by its own momentum along uncommon
     routes through the untouched courses of the channels of the brain to
--

   Physician J. J. Scheuchzer, who lived and worked around the same time
   as Hofer, had a similar view of nostalgia. However, he argued that it
   was not a result of an internal imbalance of the mind, but a condition
   influenced by external factors.

   According to him, nostalgia was caused by “a sharp differential in
   atmospheric pressure causing excessive body pressurization, which in
   turn drove blood from the heart to the brain, thereby producing the
   observed affliction of sentiment.”

   Nostalgia and homesickness as ‘disorders’

   For many centuries, doctors persisted in understanding nostalgia as a
   state of ill health that required treatment. However, views around its
   mechanisms and typology, as well as around which demographics it
--
   In a paper from 2008, Profs Wildschut, Sedikides, and their colleagues
   note that, throughout the 17th and 18th centuries, doctors thought
   nostalgia only affected the Swiss, since they mostly observed it in the
   Swiss mercenary soldiers that lent their services to foreign armies.

   Prof. Svetlana Boym writes that, at this time, cures for nostalgia
   included “leeches, warm hypnotic emulsions, opium” and returning home,
   to the Alps.
--

   Throughout the 20th century, doctors kept changing their minds about
   the nature of nostalgia, though they mostly associated it with
   homesickness, an unhelpful psychological mechanism experienced by
   students and migrants unable to adapt to a new life away from home.
--
   explain:

     “By the beginning of the 20th century, nostalgia was regarded as a
     psychiatric disorder. Symptoms included anxiety, sadness, and
     insomnia. By the mid-20th century, psychodynamic approaches
     considered nostalgia a subconscious desire to return to an earlier
     life stage, and it was labeled as a repressive compulsive disorder.
     Soon thereafter, nostalgia was downgraded to a variant of
     depression, marked by loss and grief, though still equated with
     homesickness.”

   In their 2006 article, they also point out that, for much of the 20th
   century, some psychologists viewed nostalgia as an “immigrant
   psychosis,” a “mentally repressive compulsive disorder,” or “a
   regressive manifestation closely related to the issue of loss, grief,
--
   According to Profs Wildschut, Sedikides, and their colleagues, in the
   late 20th century, doctors and researchers started to differentiate
   between nostalgia and homesickness.

   They suggest homesickness became conflated with mental health issues,
   such as separation anxiety, whereas nostalgia began to be associated
   with idealized images of childhood or past happy times.

   What are the benefits of nostalgia?

   So is nostalgia — and even homesickness — a sign that a person is
   unable to adapt to a new life, new surroundings, or the realities of
   adult life? Or does it also play a positive role in the human psyche?

   Physicians no longer treat nostalgia as a disorder, but the phenomenon
   continues to interest researchers.

--

   One study, based on the self-reported experiences of the participants,
   indicated that nostalgia is, by and large, “a positively toned and
   self-relevant emotion that is often associated with the recall of
   experiences involving interactions with important others or of
--
     negative to a positive or triumphant life scene.”

   A second study confirmed that nostalgia helps form a constructive
   narrative of meaningful events from the past, but it also identified
   some of the most common triggers of nostalgia.

   According to the researchers, most participants experienced nostalgia
   when faced with difficult life situations, such as present worries and
   anxieties. This suggested that casting their minds back to a happier or
--
   uncertainties.

   “Chief among the perceived benefits of nostalgia were its capacity to
   generate positive affect, bolster social bonds, and increase positive
   self-regard,” Profs Wildschut, Sedikides, and their colleagues write.

   Further research reveals other ways that nostalgia can be beneficial.
   For example, a 2012 paper reports that this mental state can help
   increase a person’s willingness to help others, thanks to the fact that
--

   According to Dr. Krystine Batcho — professor of psychology at LeMoyne
   College in Syracuse, NY — nostalgia also helps strengthen a person’s
   identity, their sense of self.

   In an interview for the American Psychological Association, she asserts
   that “nostalgia is an emotional experience that unifies,” that “helps
   unite our sense of who we are, our self, our identity over time,” and
   “gives us a sense of who we want to be […] in the future.”
