   Emotional Health

5 Ways Nostalgia Is Good for Your Health (and When It's Not)

   Fleeting memories from your past don’t just bring on warm and fuzzy
--
   It’s common to sometimes find yourself longing for the past — to think
   back on your childhood or early adulthood and wistfully recall memories
   that leave you feeling warm and fuzzy. That’s called nostalgia.

   “It’s the positive, wistful, or longing sentiment that one experiences
--
   Woodhouse, a licensed marriage and family therapist and director of
   clinical operations at Los Angeles–based Lightfully Behavioral Health.
   Nostalgia could come about by looking at an old photograph, talking
   with a friend, or smelling a familiar scent.

--
   scholar in the department of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at the
   University of California San Francisco School of Medicine, who studies
   nostalgia.

   It comes up clinically as well. “Sometimes when a client needs a
   grounding point, we will discuss things they look back upon fondly and
   draw upon the nostalgia experience,” Woodhouse says. “Nostalgia can be
   beneficial when dealing with dark times and reminding clients there was
   once light.”
--
   and Social Psychology, researchers (including Dr. Newman) concluded
   that thinking back on your memories is primarily a positive experience,
   and that nostalgia, practicing nostalgia, or the act of feeling
   nostalgic was more commonly linked to positive markers of health (like
   meaning in life, self-esteem, and optimism) than negative ones. But the
--
   have positive effects on people.

   Here are five benefits linked to nostalgia:

1. It May Promote Sense of Self
--
2. It Can Serve as a Barometer for Personal Growth

   Nostalgia can also show you how far you’ve come. “Change doesn’t happen
   overnight,” Woodhouse says. “When we can draw upon those positive
   experiences and reflect upon our own growth, nostalgia can be a good
   barometer to gauge how we have stayed aligned with our own values
   (which may change over time, and that's okay) and our authentic
--
3. It May Boost Mood

   Nostalgia can lead to a positive affect, according to a study published
   April 2021 in Consciousness and Cognition. If you’re feeling bogged
   down by negativity, dipping into nostalgic feelings could help
--
   satisfied you felt eating your grandma’s famous cherry pie as a kid.

   In fact, research suggests that feelings of nostalgia increased during
   COVID-19 quarantines, serving as a comfort during isolating times,
   according to a review article published in 2021 in the Journal of
--

   According to a study published in April 2021 in the journal Emotion,
   nostalgia is a highly social emotion that connects us to others. Based
   on a series of five experiments, the researchers concluded that
   nostalgia can be used as a way to facilitate "help seeking behavior" by
   fostering social connectedness.

--
   connecting over shared experiences from the past, such as Millennials
   relating over '90s cartoons and dial-up connections, Woodhouse says.
   "Nostalgia can unify our experiences."

5. It Could Make You More Optimistic

   The aforementioned February 2020 paper from the Journal of Personality
   and Social Psychology noted that nostalgia can increase optimism. This
   is rooted in the fact that, oftentimes, reminiscing about fond memories
   brings us back to happy times. “When we remember good times or
--
   says.

The Potential Downside of Nostalgia

   Most of the time when someone talks about nostalgia, they’re referring
   to personal nostalgia, or longing for moments they’ve experienced in
   their own life. As mentioned, this experience is generally positive,
   but it can bring on sadness, too.

   Newman calls it a mixed emotion. Anticipatory nostalgia, for instance,
   which is missing the present while you’re still living it, can result
   in sadness, according to a study published May 2020 in Frontiers in
   Psychology. Anticipatory nostalgia is defined in the paper as the
   “premature missing of what is still present” and “future loss.”

   Nostalgia can also induce sadness if you’re yearning for the past, and
   upset that the times you’re thinking of no longer exist. “When you long
   for a time in your past, it can make you miss that time,” Newman says.
--
   ‘what ifs’ and ‘should haves,’ which can lead to depression,” she says.

   Whether the experience of nostalgia will be positive or negative can
   depend on how it’s introduced. The same 2020 study published in the
   Journal of Personality and Social Psychology that suggested nostalgia
   can boost optimism also found that it is more closely linked with
   sadness if the nostalgia was unprompted and came up organically during
   the day. But it’s more positive if you’re specifically asked to
   reminisce.

   In addition to personal nostalgia, there’s historical or collective
   nostalgia, which is a longing for a time in history that you did not
   personally experience, according to the American Psychological
   Association.
--
   though you never lived during that time,” Newman says.

   Historical nostalgia can be dangerous, however, if someone in power
   uses it to push society back toward negative concepts and practices,
   such as racism or discrimination. Newman adds that there can also be a
   positive side to historical nostalgia in that it can lead to a greater
   sense of connectedness. “So there could be some benefits and harmful
   consequences, too,” he says.
