   #Constructed Nostalgia for Rock’s Golden Age: “I Believe in Yesterday”
   La nostalgie construite Volume !, Numéros Volume !, Documents

--
   La revue des musiques populaires

   AccueilTous les numéros11 : 1Rock & chansonConstructed Nostalgia for
   Rock’s ...

--
   Rock & chanson

Constructed Nostalgia for Rock’s Golden Age: “I Believe in Yesterday”

   Deena Weinstein
--
   The phenomenon of rock’s past having occluded its present is examined
   through the intentionality that grounds it culturally. Specifically,
   neo-nostalgia (Jameson) and similar postmodern terms (simulation,
   construction) constitute the intentionality and the commercial
   interests of the music industry and the generational power of the Baby
   Boomers and Gen X are the structural determinants. Neo-nostalgia for
   rock’s past is directed toward an aestheticized imaginary of rock’s
   golden age — a mythical time that never was, rather than a supposed
   eternal transcendent (religion) or an individualized empirical past
   (homesickness). Nostalgia for a construction, fabricated for corporate
   profit and generational/parental power, is a depthless and riskless
   adventure for a generation that experiences severe constraints on its
--
Keywords:

   memory / nostalgia / retro, music / recording industry, mainstream /
   commercialism / commodification, marketing / communication /
   advertising, authenticity, age / generation, archives / reissues /
--

   Rock Zombies Invade The Living
   Constructed Nostalgia
   Commodification of Nostalgia
   Youth without Youth
   Conclusion
--
   Knebworth festival Afficher l’image

   1Nostalgia isn’t what it used to be and neither is rock. In a sense,
   rock today is even more what it used to be while nostalgia, especially
   nostalgia about rock music, has changed so much that it deserves a new
   name. It once referred to direct experience; now it is mainly a
   cultural construction, so it would be more precise to refer to it as
   cultural nostalgia. Both nostalgia and rock have had their own
   histories, the first as old as the human past itself, and, the second
   inaugurated in the middle of the last century.

   The relationship between nostalgia and rock has flipped – originally
   nostalgia was often influenced by rock, whereas today rock is impelled
   by nostalgia’s new incarnation. The following discussion traces the
   conjunction of rock and nostalgia in terms of a general (post-modern)
   cultural analysis and its social-structural grounds.

--
     Thinking””.

Constructed Nostalgia

   11Rock hasn’t changed to become exactly what it used to be. It carries
   a severely edited version of its past with many artists and recordings
   redacted, and others, especially those from the late 1960s and early
   1970s, bolded and underlined. On the other hand, nostalgia is something
   more than it has been with a history far older than the word itself.

     The oldest form of nostalgia, first documented in those who lived
     and died in the same community in which they were born, was for some
     mythic past. It was a past when the gods interacted with humans. In
--
     Eden. It was the home of human beings, the home of us all, a
     wonderful place-time to which we could never “return,” providing
     that dual sweet and bitter feeling that characterizes nostalgia.

   12Nostalgia’s second incarnation, adding to but not erasing that
   originary type, began once there were armies stationed or fighting for
   years in foreign lands, sailors, traders, or explorers discovering “new
   worlds,” and whole communities forced from their ancestral lands. This
   new type was a longing to return to a real, not ideal, site, in which
   people once lived. By the 17^th century, such nostalgia was understood,
   at least by the Swiss whose mercenary armies experienced it, as a
   medical problem. Many soldiers pining for home physically deteriorated
--
   doctor Johannes Hofer, who coined his neologism in 1688 from two Greek
   words, nost (return or home) and algia (pain) (Hofer, 1688). This
   pre-industrial denotation of nostalgia as a desire to return to one’s
   native land, or the bittersweet memories of it, persisted and is still
   in use. For example, the Irish escaping famine and populating the
--
   in shebeens and then saloons and sing Irish songs (Rosenzweig, 1983).

   Perhaps for some, the object of nostalgia is a place, but, less than a
   century later, one of Hofer’s countrymen, Jean Jacques Rousseau, would
   interpret the term in a broader way. In his Dictionary of Music,
--
   childhood as his youth itself. He is not straining toward something
   which he can repossess, but toward an age which is forever beyond his
   reach” (Kant, 1798: 95). Rousseau and Kant comprehend nostalgia as it
   has mainly been understood in the modern world. Lunching with a friend,
   a professor of art about 50 years old, I asked him about the music he
--
   him a strong sense of his self? “Yes, definitely.”

   14The third incarnation of nostalgia is the meaning that characterizes
   the current period and that applies to the domination of rock’s past
   over its present. Whereas originary nostalgia was directed toward a
   mythical “golden age” that was deemed to have existed and was lost, and
   modern nostalgia refers to an individualized experienced past that can
   no longer be recovered, contemporary nostalgia is a construct of the
   communications media that is directed to a simulation of a
   de-individualized empirical past that never existed as such and is not
   directly part of the lives of the individuals who experience the
   nostalgia.

   15Contemporary nostalgia is neither for everyone’s personal past nor
   for a concrete individual’s life history, but for a social
   construction. It is constructed nostalgia that the students who would
   prefer to have lived in the 1960s or in some later decades of the
   twentieth century, feel (e.g. “I would have rather been a teenager in
--
   rock functions here as a “memorative sign” for a representation, a sign
   for a sign. As Pickering and Keightley (2006: 929) grasp it,
   contemporary nostalgia is self-referential: the individual who feels it
   is engaged in a process of “mediated nostalgic remembering.”

   In his commentary on Frederic Jameson’s discussion of nostalgia in
   postmodernity, Brown defines Jameson’s notion of “neo-nostalgia” as
   “the pseudo-historical appeal of a bygone aesthetic.” That appeal “is
   achieved by stylistic evocations and temporal stereotypes, which convey
   various forms of past-ness”(Brown, 2001: 310).

   16Nostalgia for rock’s past is a form of “mediated nostalgic
   remembering.” There was, indeed, an empirical past of rock, but it has
   been taken up in the present as mediated and then re-mediated to
   create, for example, the 1960s as a set of selective representations in
   which some artists, music, and events are highlighted and others
   eliminated. In that process of selection and simplification, nostalgia
   is aestheticized – it becomes a pose that can be felt intensely, but
   that does not connect the individual to an “eternal tradition” or to a
   personal history, but to an image lacking insistency.

   17Aestheticized nostalgia for past rock lacks seriousness in the sense
   that it does not instigate any attempt by those who feel it to try to
   recreate the past, except sporadically and episodically. To dwell in
   the constructed golden age is to experience its culture as an imaginary
   (similar to originary nostalgia), but also as the survival of an
   empirical past in which there is interest but no commitment.

   That aestheticized nostalgia should have come to be the dominant
   intentionality towards rock might be an irony, since rock’s ideology
   privileges authenticity and novelty as the requisites for having one’s
--
   reversal have happened?

Commodification of Nostalgia

   18Why has rock’s past swamped its present? Why is rock today mired in
   neo-nostalgia? There are two major structural determinants of this
   constructed nostalgia. The major one is economic, essentially,
   commercial capitalism doing what it is supposed to do. Each of the
   companies that comprise the complex of the rock industry is focused on
--
   audiences. To make audiences desire the “back catalog,” they have also
   had to promote rock’s past and construct a simulation of the past that
   would instigate neo-nostalgia.

   That is exactly what the big players have done, aided and abetted by a
--
   33Writers and documentarians, accompanying the major record labels,
   concert promoters and classic rock djs, create an auratic imaginary of
   rock’s past that breeds neo-nostalgia. These hypesters of the canon
   create some Golden Age that never was, but can be heard in this $100
   box set, or seen for a few hours and $355 in person. These writers and
--

   Mass media reports on the death further reinforce that
   nostalgia-inducing imaginary. The innumerable TV, radio, magazine, and
   newspaper accounts of Lennon’s death referenced not the man and the
   four decades in which he lived, or even the nearly two decades in which
--

   The imaginary is also alive and well in video games like the Guitar
   Hero and Rock Band franchises. These simulations foster neo-nostalgia
   for an aestheticized golden age, a simulation itself. Hodson’s analysis
   of the Beatles Rock Band Game is illustrative. “The game produces a
--
   relationship to commodity over community” he writes (Hodson, 2012: 72).
   “Rather than just a commodification of play, Beatles Rock Band is a
   game that also commodifies nostalgia” (Hodson, 2012: 81).

   37For Jameson, neo-nostalgia is a matter of substituting an
   imaginary/construction/simulation/myth for what actually presumably
   happened at some time in the past. Neo-nostalgia takes that
   construction as its object and then judges the present to be inferior
   to the construction — it would have been better to live then, but at
--
   factor — the power of the Boomer generation especially in the US —
   insured that hegemony. The cultural power of the baby-boomers is a
   second structural foundation for constructed nostalgia.

   39The most obvious factor in boomer-power is the fact that Boomers
--
   their rock, listening to it, or to the newer music made by the bands of
   the late 1960s and early 1970s. Their music was, in Rousseau’s (1768:
   267) term, a “memorative sign”, creating a sense of nostalgia, in
   Kant’s sense, “toward an age which is forever beyond his reach” (Kant,
   1798). As these bands began to be seen as “great” aesthetically, they
--
   Alternative rock, R.E.M., Nirvana, Pearl Jam, and Smashing Pumpkins
   were among the commercially most successful. It has turned out that
   Gen-X was the last generation before neo-nostalgia buried new musical
   initiatives by young people.

--
   generation, which has substituted the effect of “youthfulness” for
   actual youth itself — another aestheticization and simulation that
   accompanies and is bound up with neo-nostalgia.

Conclusion
--
   sense, youth.

   51 Neo-nostalgia — Frederic Jameson’s precise contribution to
   postmodern discourse — is the framing intentionality of the event of
   rock’s past occluding its present. (New rock has not disappeared: it
--
   an overhanging past in Baudrillard’s Simulations (1983), the critique
   of the modern culminates with its subjective component in
   (neo)nostalgia.

   52 The myth of rock’s “golden age” is an aetheticization of rock’s
--
   artifact.

   53Neo-nostalgia for rock’s past is a riskless adventure.
   Haut de page

--

   Hodson, J. (2012), “When I'm Sixty-Four: Beatles Rock Band and the
   Commodification of Nostalgia”, Loading… The Journal of the Canadian
   Game Studies Association, vol. 6, n° 10, 72-89.

   Hofer, J. (1688), Dissertatio Medica de Nostalgia, Bâle, J. Bertsch
   [cited in Starobinski].

--
   October 2014]

   Pickering, M. & Keightley, E. (2006), “The Modalities of Nostalgia”,
   Current Sociology, vol. 54, n° 6, November, 919–941.

--
   [1768, cited in Starobinski].

   Starobinski, J. (1966), “The Idea of Nostalgia”, trans. W.S. Kemp,
   Diogenes vol. 54, 81-103.

--
Référence papier

   Deena Weinstein, « Constructed Nostalgia for Rock’s Golden Age: “I
   Believe in Yesterday” », Volume !, 11 : 1 | 2014, 20-36.

Référence électronique

   Deena Weinstein, « Constructed Nostalgia for Rock’s Golden Age: “I
   Believe in Yesterday” », Volume ! [En ligne], 11 : 1 | 2014, mis en
   ligne le 30 décembre 2016, consulté le 17 décembre 2022. URL :
