   #Thriveworks » Restorative vs. reflective nostalgia: Learn to spot the
   differences and combat memory distortions Comments Feed alternate
   alternate alternate
--
   [home-icon.png] Learn Coping Skills, Mental Health Topics

Restorative vs. reflective nostalgia: Learn to spot the differences and
combat memory distortions

--
   [gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==]
   [arrow-down.png]
     * Nostalgia is a familiar feeling, but there are actually two
       different types—reflective and restorative nostalgia.
     * Restorative nostalgia involves happy memories and associations with
       the past. When we feel restoratively nostalgic, we’re likely to
       feel motivated to seek out new and rewarding experiences.
     * Conversely, reflective nostalgia may often make us feel gloomy and
       disappointed, making it seem that the present moment doesn’t
       compare with our memories, preventing us from moving forward and
       making new positive experiences.
     * Though they might sound like polar opposites, both types of
       nostalgia can be empowering experiences, if we learn to harness
       their emotional power.
     * Feeling reflectively nostalgic can be counteracted by remembering
--
   days gone by has a bittersweet quality, one that can be difficult to
   express. We’ve all felt nostalgic, but we may not be as familiar with
   the two types of nostalgia: restorative and reflective. While
   restorative nostalgia makes us feel positive about our past and
   motivates us to seek out new possibilities and experiences, reflective
   nostalgia often leaves us upset and wistful, thinking that our best
   days are behind us.

--
   that our brains are rewarding or even bribing us into seeking out
   positive experiences in order to keep the good vibes flowing. In
   contrast, feelings of reflective nostalgia cause us to shut ourselves
   off to new possibilities; in this state of mind, we might actually be
   susceptible to developing depression or anxiety. Despite the
   drastically different ways that restorative and reflective nostalgia
   affect us, psychologists now know that our ability to recall past
   events isn’t very accurate. Most memories, good or bad (and especially
--
   white-and-green-wooden-house-miniature

Reflective vs. Restorative Nostalgia

   Reflective nostalgia was first described in the 17th century when Swiss
   physician Dr. Johannes Hofer noted that soldiers who were stationed
   abroad would often long for their home country, experiencing a
--
   effect of their memories could not be mistaken.

   When the past is viewed through the lens of reflective nostalgia, we’re
   typically closed off to the possibility of change and are reflecting
   back on old memories in order to seek refuge. We don’t see potential in
--

   Regardless of whether you’re experiencing reflective or restorative
   nostalgia, it’s important to recognize and harness the emotional power
   of these unique psychological experiences. You can clear the haze
   associated with memory distortions from your train of thought by taking
--
       encounter at least some resistance in our efforts.

   Unlike restorative nostalgia, sensations of reflective nostalgia aren’t
   pleasant. Evaluate whether your negative emotions could be attached to
   an underlying mental health condition. Reflecting too long on adversity
--
How to Harness Restorative Nostalgic Memories

   When you feel the rush of restorative nostalgia, try to:
     * Soak it all in, but don’t dwell in the past for too long. If you’re
       thinking about lost friends, an old relationship, or a breakthrough
--
     Mental Health Topics

     Restorative vs. reflective nostalgia: Learn to spot the differences
   and combat memory distortions
