    #Manipal The Talk Network » Feed Manipal The Talk Network » Comments
   Feed Manipal The Talk Network » The Neurology of Nostalgia—Why Do We
   Long for the Past? Comments Feed alternate alternate

--
   Open Search

The Neurology of Nostalgia—Why Do We Long for the Past?


--


   Nostalgia is defined as “a feeling of pleasure and also slight sadness
   when you think about things that happened in the past”, by the
   Cambridge Dictionary. The term nostalgia encompasses that bittersweet
   feeling of recollecting fond memories of the past. From flipping
   through photo albums to scrolling through your photo gallery, from
--

   Derived from the Greek words “nostos” (meaning homecoming) and “algos”
   (meaning pain/ache), nostalgia used to have negative associations
   historically and was often thought of as a disease. However, the
   meaning of the word has metamorphosed over the years. Present-day
   research portrays an entirely different story that has unraveled behind
   the scenes, through experiments and studies. These studies have found
   that nostalgia can enrich resilience and happiness amongst humans.
   Further, the more nostalgia that is experienced, the more optimistic a
   person is likely to become.


Nostalgia in Neurology: Your brain rewards you and is proud of you!

   Experiencing nostalgia cannot be limited by viewing it as solely a
   feeling. Although nostalgia is defined appropriately, it is often used
   loosely — ignoring the implications it has on the human mind and brain
   function.
--
   visual and cosy memory that makes you smile? Or perhaps a whiff of some
   flower that takes you back to your grandmother’s garden? Some factors
   like smell, music or scenery can trigger nostalgia in us. The trigger
   of nostalgia is usually an environmental factor such as a conversation
   with a childhood friend, or a certain significant date. However, it may
   also involve instinctive remembrance of the past.

   Every time nostalgia is experienced, a part of the brain is activated.
   The performance and activity of the brain’s reward systems and memory
   system are altered through stimulation. This includes the hippocampus —
--
   When the reward systems in the brain are triggered, a chemical known as
   Dopamine is released. Researchers have led experiments using Magnetic
   Resonance Imaging (MRI) scans to reveal that when nostalgia is felt,
   there is a close link between the release of dopamine and memories in
   the hippocampus. The dopamine deposits itself directly in the
--


   In this sense, nostalgia itself can be considered to be a type of
   reward since it allows us to relive memories of the past. This also
   explains how when you think about specific memories or details
--

   Thus, in our constant stride towards the future, recalling and reliving
   happy memories from the past and creating the feeling of nostalgia, as
   a result, can lead to boosted levels of happiness, and reduced stress
   levels.


Nostalgia Marketing: Your Fond Memories of the Past—Offer Valid Till Stocks
Last!

   Over the years, the powerhouses of the world — politicians, marketers
   and large organizations — have taken to nostalgia as a trick under
   their sleeves. Since nostalgia brings back strong emotion, it is easily
   used as an appeal, ploying the common person to create connections.

--
   Washing Powder Nirma, Parle-G biscuits, Frooti — these are just some of
   several Indian brands that established themselves years ago and took to
   nostalgia marketing decades later. The reason they are able to do
   brilliantly in the market even today is because their brand recall
   value is immensely powerful. Their products are purchased and
   advertisements watched because viewers are able to feel an emotional
   connect and nostalgia of their childhood days.


   An often-used proverb, old is gold, is particularly relevant here.
   Nostalgia marketing taps into emotions and connectedness, taking people
   for a trip down memory lane. A marketers’ target audience is likely to
   remain loyal if they can connect to the brand. Nostalgia marketing
   allows brands to acknowledge the present without letting go of the
   past. Consumers today are able to re-experience the past through
--
   to the advertisement, it translates into a connection with the brand.

Cultural Implications of Nostalgia


     Nostalgia is like a grammar lesson: you find the present tense, but
     the past perfect!

--

   A Professor of Sociology and Personality Psychology,  Constantine
   Sedikides, describes Nostalgia as the “perfect internal politician,
   connecting the past with the present, pointing optimistically to the
   future.” Nostalgia has the power to bring a group of people closer and
   allows a person to establish a better connection with themselves.


   Through the knowledge of its impact and a deeper dive into how
   nostalgia works — the benefit of nostalgia can be applied to personal
   lives. Nostalgia can be a harbinger of a sense of calm and joy.
   However, treading carefully on this front is a must, because it doesn’t
   take much for nostalgia to become a cycle of negativity. “Those were
   simpler times, can’t we just go back to those days?” are especially
   common thoughts when recalling childhood memories. Instead of trying to
--
   between where you are today and where you were years ago. This can also
   be a signal of growth and positive change. It is also important to
   acknowledge how the moments that cause nostalgia today have augmented
   life over the years.

Childhood and the Nostalgic effect on Decisions

   As said before, nostalgia arises from memories, and typically it starts
   when we become young adults. So usually nostalgia is shaped a lot by
   childhood memories— a time when there were almost no responsibilities
   and when our thoughts and vision of the world were a lot simpler. It
--
   would refuse to think otherwise.

Nostalgia and Dreams

   Dreams and memories have a rather interesting connection. It has been
--
   Hence a dream can actually create contact between us and people we
   haven’t met for a long time. It can show us places from far away
   memories and thus trigger nostalgia in us. It can let us interact with
   our past memories or fond experiences and be a great source of comfort
   to us. Sometimes we might even feel very strong emotions and the dream
   may seem so real that they are more impactful than real-life emotions.

Nostalgia as Therapy

   Nostalgia may be a bittersweet state of mind, but when looked at
   deeply, its positive aspects outweigh the negative. After all, it’s a
   filtered recollection of our memories. It is there to trigger
--
   us feel more human and closer to people around us. It can rekindle
   relationships and strengthen bonds in newly formed ones. When we feel
   hopeless, nostalgia can remind us that there’s scope for making good
   memories in future and helps us to push through the tough times.

   For people who feel detached from their past selves, nostalgia is a
   great tool to create a sense of self-continuity and remind them of the
   factors that haven’t changed in our personalities. Many people might
   feel that their lives have been for nought, that there were no
   contributions from their side. Nostalgia can make them realise the
   value of human interactions and every other beautiful memory they
   created in the past.
--
   General, Informative

   dreams, neurology, Nostalgia

Post navigation
