   Collaboration and teams

The Surprising Power of Nostalgia at Work

   It can deepen relationships, foster creativity, and boost a collective
--
   Summary.

   Nostalgia is an important psychological resource that helps individuals
   cope with life’s stressors, build strong relationships, find and
   maintain meaning in life, and become more creative and inspired. By
   understanding how nostalgia works, managers can utilize its power to
   help their organizations thrive. The author presents three reasons to
   do so. First, it brings the social self online by increasing social
--
   strengthening social and group bonds. Second, it can reduce turnover by
   helping work feel meaningful — especially for employees who are burned
   out. Third, because nostalgia makes people feel socially supported,
   energized, and confident, it can help employees feel more creative and
   inspired.
--
   Ler em português

   Many people assume that nostalgia is purely entertainment, a feeling
   individuals enjoy because it takes them back to the more carefree days
   of their youth. Some view it as maladaptive fixation on the past,
   perhaps indicating a fear of change. I’ve heard business analysts and
   leaders argue that, although nostalgia may help some companies sell
   consumers a range of products, it’s ultimately bad for business and the
   economy. They imagine that by keeping people focused on the past,
   nostalgia undermines innovation, creativity, and ultimately progress.

   From that perspective, there’s little reason for managers to view
   nostalgia as having value within their organizations. However, a
   growing body of research reveals that it’s an important psychological
   resource that helps individuals cope with life’s stressors, build
   strong relationships, find and maintain meaning in life, and become
   more creative and inspired. I’ve been conducting research on the
   psychology of nostalgia for almost 20 years. Based on what I’ve
   learned, I believe managers can use the power of nostalgia to help
   their organizations thrive.

Nostalgia Is a Psychological Resource

   First, managers need to understand how nostalgia actually works. When
   people engage in nostalgia, they’re accessing personally meaningful
   autobiographical events typically shared with family, friends, and
   other close connections. It isn’t just a happy trip down memory lane —
--
   in which negative feelings such as longing and loss give way to
   positive feelings such as happiness, social connectedness, gratitude,
   and hope. In other words, nostalgia is bittersweet, but more sweet than
   bitter.

   Nostalgia can be triggered by explicit reminders of the past, such as
   running into an old friend or hearing music from one’s youth, but
   people also often become nostalgic when they’re feeling down or
   distressed in some way. Common psychological triggers of nostalgia
   include feelings of sadness, loneliness, meaninglessness, uncertainty,
   and boredom.

   These negative psychological states increase nostalgia because
   nostalgia is restorative. After conducting dozens of studies using
   diverse methods ranging from qualitative text analysis, self-report
   surveys, and behavioral and neuroscientific experiments, my colleagues
   and I have concluded that nostalgia is best described as a
   self-regulatory existential resource that people naturally and
   frequently use to navigate stress and uncertainty and find the
   motivation needed to move forward with purpose and focus. The impact of
   nostalgia on meaning is particularly important because meaning in life
   has great motivational power. Research finds that nostalgia motivates
   the pursuit of important life goals by increasing that sense of
   meaning.
--
   Humans are an existential species. To flourish, we need to make
   meaningful social connections and feel like we’re contributing to the
   world in a way that matters. Nostalgia serves these existential
   endeavors. Here are three reasons for managers to bring this adaptive
   feature of human psychology into their organizations — and ways to do
   it.

1. Nostalgia can help build strong relationships and teams

   Social bonds are a central feature of nostalgia. Most nostalgic
   memories involve other people, and when individuals reflect on these
   memories, they feel more socially connected and supported. Managers can
   take advantage of nostalgia’s social nature to promote strong
   relationships and teams. Encouraging employees to share nostalgic
   stories with team members may help them build deeper connections
   because nostalgia orients people toward social goals. For example, in
   one set of studies my colleagues and I conducted, we found that having
   research participants spend a few minutes reflecting on a nostalgic
--

   We also observed that when people are experiencing higher levels of
   nostalgia, they’re more interested in working on tasks with others, and
   nostalgia has been shown to increase empathy for others and prosocial
   behavior in the forms of volunteering and charitable donations.
   Research also finds that, when people are part of a group, nostalgia
   for an event shared within it makes people more committed to the group.

   Nostalgia brings the social self online. It increases social agency and
   directs that agency toward helping others and strengthening social and
   group bonds. Given the importance of positive relationships and
   effective teams for both the health of individual employees and the
   organization, managers should explore ways to incorporate nostalgia
   into team-building activities, as well as social events like workplace
   celebrations and retreats. For example, create a retro music playlist
   by asking employees to submit nostalgia-themed song requests. This will
   give employees of different ages and with different experiences the
   opportunity to revisit their own nostalgic memories, which energizes
   the desire to connect with others. It will also inspire them to share
   these memories with others, which helps build deeper connections and
   increase nostalgia in others. Indeed, research finds that exposure to
   other people’s nostalgic memories increases one’s own nostalgia and all
   the associated psychological benefits — in other words, nostalgia is
   contagious.

2. Nostalgia can help make work feel meaningful and reduce turnover

   As an existential resource, nostalgia helps people maintain and enhance
   meaning in the present — when they reflect on past meaningful
   experiences, they become motivated to prioritize meaning in the
--
   those experiencing burnout. A series of studies found that when workers
   were prompted to reflect on experiences within their organization that
   made them nostalgic (organizational nostalgia), they subsequently
   reported a greater sense of meaning at work and lower turnover
   intentions. These effects were most pronounced among employees
--
   which can provide guidance for how to restore meaning at work in the
   present. Developing organizational social rituals and traditions can
   help create organizational nostalgia in the first place — it’s an
   investment in the future. For example, organizations could hold monthly
   game nights, potluck dinners, movie screenings, book clubs, or other
--
   organization is undergoing major changes that cause anxiety,
   interpersonal conflict, or other negative experiences, organizational
   nostalgia may prove to be a vital resource.

3. Nostalgia can help organizations be more creative and inspired

   Managers looking to cultivate outside-the-box thinking can also take
   advantage of nostalgia. A workplace that encourages employees to both
   share nostalgic memories and make new ones with their coworkers primes
   the pump of creativity. People are more likely to feel comfortable
   taking risks and exploring new ideas when they feel socially supported,
   energized, and confident. Nostalgia generates these states and can thus
   offer a way to orient employees toward creative thinking and
   problem-solving.
--
   open-minded and creative, and critically, made them produce more
   creative content (as judged by independent evaluators). In addition,
   our research shows that nostalgia makes people feel more inspired.

   While on the subject of creativity, it’s worth noting that there is no
   single right way of inducing nostalgia. Our studies as well as those
   conducted by other research teams have utilized diverse nostalgia
   prompts, such as having people write about a nostalgic memory, read
   accounts of other people’s nostalgic memories, read song lyrics that
   make them nostalgic, listen to nostalgic music, watch nostalgic music
   videos, look at old photographs, visit nostalgia-themed websites,
   create scrapbooks, and engage in activities using augmented reality
   technology.

   Managers should look for opportunities to introduce nostalgia in ways
   they believe will best fit their organizational environment and
   culture. What’s most important is that managers appreciate that
   meaningfully connecting the present to the past via nostalgia can help
   them and their employees have the mindset and motivation needed to
   productively work toward future-oriented individual and organizational
