
   Home // News & Advocacy // Podcasts // Speaking of Psychology //
   Speaking of Psychology: Does nostalgia...

Speaking of Psychology: Does nostalgia have a psychological purpose?

Episode 93 – Does Nostalgia Have a Psychological Purpose?

   What psychological purpose does nostalgia serve? Is it good or bad? Are
   we more nostalgic today in our hectic, connected world? Is there such a
   thing as the “good ‘ol days”? Here to help explain is Krystine Batcho,
   PhD, professor of psychology at LeMoyne College in Syracuse, New York.
   She’s an expert on nostalgia and developed the Nostalgia Inventory, a
   survey that assesses proneness to personal nostalgia.

About the expert: Krystine Batcho, PhD
--
   research has ranged from early work in human-computer interaction to
   the impact of higher education on the development of moral and social
   responsibility. Her current research on the psychology of nostalgia
   began with her introduction of the Nostalgia Inventory, a survey that
   assesses proneness to personal nostalgia. The Nostalgia Inventory has
   been translated into multiple languages, made available as an app and
   has been used in numerous research studies. Her scholarly publications
--
   host, Kaitlin Luna.

   Nostalgia, that longing feeling for the past when things seemed better,
   easier, and more fun. It's the feeling behind countless number one
   hits. It's what's resurrecting old TV shows and being capitalized on by
   politicians. We all know the feeling. Some of us maybe a little too
   well. What psychological purpose does nostalgia serve? Is it good or
   bad? Are we more nostalgic today in our hectic connected world? Is
   there such a thing as the good old days? Here to help explain is Dr.
   Krystine Batcho, professor of psychology at LeMoyne College in
   Syracuse, New York. She's an expert on nostalgia and develops the
   nostalgia inventory, a survey that assesses proneness to personal
   nostalgia. Welcome, Dr. Batcho.

   Dr. Krystine Batcho: Thank you so much. I love talking about nostalgia.
   Thank you for inviting me.

   Luna: Absolutely. Absolutely, we look forward to hearing all about it.
   As a psychologist and a researcher of nostalgia, how do you describe
   nostalgia?

   Batcho: That's a very important question because today many people are
   researching nostalgia, but they might be using the word differently. In
   fact, some people are probably talking about a slightly different
   experience or construct. I'm pretty faithful to the origins of the word
   nostalgia. The word was coined or invented a long time ago, over 300
   years ago, and originally designated homesickness. Well, semantic drift
   over the centuries has broadened that to the notion of longing for or
   missing aspects of a person's personal lived past. That is the kind of
   nostalgia or that is what I mean when I talk about nostalgia and it's a
   wonderfully complex paradoxical experience.

   Luna: Can you talk about the role of nostalgia in the human psyche. Why
   do we have that feeling?

   Batcho: Most of the research available today including my research
   argues that nostalgia serves a number of functions. The thing that ties
   them all together is that nostalgia is an emotional experience that
   unifies. One example of this is it helps to unite our sense of who we
   are, our self, our identity over time. Because over time we change
   constantly we change in incredible ways. We're not anywhere near the
   same as we were when we were three years old, for example. Nostalgia by
   motivating us to remember the past in our own life helps to unite us to
   that authentic self and remind us of who we have been and then compare
--

   That gives us a sense of who we want to be down the road in the future.
   The other way that nostalgia serves an essential psychological function
   is that it is a highly social emotion. It connects us to other people.
   It does that and so many beautiful ways. In the beginning, when we're
--
   our life, our parents, our siblings, our friends. As we go through
   life, it can broaden out and extend to a wider sphere of the people we
   interact with. It's a social connectedness phenomenon and nostalgia is
   in that sense a very healthy pro-social emotion.

--
   and being able to revisit it and relive it again.

   Luna: You've explained that there's two different kinds of nostalgia.
   There's the personal which we've just touched on and historical. Can
   you explain what each one is?

   Batcho: In fact today, many people are arguing that there are even more
   varieties of nostalgia but when I first began collecting empirical
   evidence in the mid-1990s, I knew that another inventory existed. It
   was put together by a psychologist named Holbrook. That one contained
   items that were more oriented toward history and society across the
   years. That is the type that I refer to as historical nostalgia. The
   evidence shows that someone who experiences historical nostalgia might
   even have an emotional attachment to or longing for times in history
   that predate their own birth. That is very different from personal
   nostalgia.

   Personal nostalgia means that you are longing for or feeling good about
   aspects of your life that you already live through and have stored in
   your memory. My original data, in the beginning, demonstrated that
   individuals can be experiencing a lot of one type of the nostalgia and
   maybe not much of the other. They're relatively non-correlated or
   independent phenomena. They're not the same thing.

   Luna: Your research has shown that nostalgia can be a stabilizing force
   and comfort us during times of change and transition. Can you explain
   that a bit more?
--
   how far that person has come in life.

   In a way, Nostalgia is like a measurement. It's a way we keep track of
   things, we monitor progress through life, not just for ourselves, but
   even for other people to whom we are very attached.
--
   today's political climate where many people are longing to return to
   "the good old days" in the United States. What does this say to you as
   a nostalgia researcher?

   Batcho: It tells me a couple of things. First of all, different people
--
   reasons. Let's say, someone who is old enough to have lived through,
   for example, the 1950s, they might actually be experiencing some
   personal nostalgia because they're remembering how they and their
   family celebrated holidays, or what it was like going to school in the
   mid-1950s. That phenomenon would be very, very different for a younger
   person, for example, a member of the millennial generation. For them,
   it's not personal nostalgia, it's historical. Historical nostalgia, in
   my research, suggests is more likely triggered by dissatisfaction with
   the present.
--
   way, this is a two-edged sword because just as we can idealize and
   romanticize and therefore distort the accuracy of memories, we can go
   in the other direction. One of the reasons I find nostalgia so
   fascinating is because I have an interest in connecting the theoretical
   research in the laboratory to people's lived experiences because of
--
   nostalgic they would be then for those days? The answer to that is much
   more complicated than I thought it would be. I thought that those
   individuals would have the least amount of nostalgia. It turns out that
   it probably depends upon two things.

--
   didn't have enough to eat? Do you remember when somebody was unkind to
   us?" That person is an influence on our memory retrieval processes and
   we're more likely then to experience nostalgia in a negative way. On
   the other hand, if you're hanging out with people who are laughing
   about the funny times and the times when something embarrassing
--
   is missing might be this social connectedness up close and personal. On
   the other hand, it might be that people are losing track of their sense
   of purpose and meaning and the nostalgia, one of its healthiest
   functions is to keep us on track with regard to the meaningfulness of
   our lives.

   Data suggests that nostalgia facilitates our understanding of meaning
   in life and so in a way when we look at all the reboots and people
   going back to the past, it might be telling us that people aren't 100%
--
   while. I don't think it's going to continue on unabated, however.

   Luna: Is there some element of infectiousness to nostalgia? I mean, we
   talked about obviously people have more access to seeing these things
   online and they can share it, but even people, if they're physically
--
   broaden it out a little more.

   Luna: Can this nostalgia be a destructive force that can really
   incubate anger, isolation or hatred? It seems like it could have that
   potential

   Batcho: Most of the research suggests that nostalgia is aligned with or
   correlated with very soft, pro-social emotions such as compassion,
   empathy, altruism. It's unlikely, generally, to be associated with
--
   they were among, were not able to share that.

   What leads ultimately to a healthy kind of nostalgia is the one where
   the positive pro-social aspects of nostalgia can reconnect us now. Not
   just to people in our past but to the people we're dealing with today.
   That is possible, that can happen. All the memoirs that I've studied,
--

   The other aspect of this is that some people are looking at what they
   might refer to as social nostalgia and looking at groups and having
   designs where they're comparing intra-group versus inter-group. In
   those situations, you're perhaps talking about a slightly different
   phenomenon.

   Luna: Can nostalgia hold us back by keeping us dwelling on the past?
   Can it really impede what is happening in the current moment and in the
   future?
--

   I've thought a great deal about this and most of the research I've
   covered it looks like this. Nostalgia is bittersweet. Why did it evolve
   that way? If you take a social evolutionary perspective, it would make
   perfect sense that we would want to revisit our past so that we always
--
   that they're undergoing a very intolerable current situation in their
   life and they might seek counseling to help them deal with that because
   they're using nostalgia then or their memories as an escape. For the
   most part, most people my research shows, because nostalgia is a social
   emotion it is actually correlated with or associated with healthy
   coping mechanisms such as seeking out others when they're having
--
   we're experiencing today so it's generally healthy.

   Luna: How does age affect a person's feelings of nostalgia? Is it
   across the board or is it older or younger people?

   Batcho: My original data set suggested that there is a bump in
   nostalgia where it peaks not in old age as many theorists would have
   expected but peaks in young adulthood. Most theorists argue that the
   reason for that increase in nostalgia during young adulthood is because
   it's such a pivotal developmental transitional period. It is literally
   the time when a person has one foot still back in their childhood and
--
   on because there's a bit over reluctance out of trepidation. Will my
   future be as wonderful and as rosy as my past was? We know that
   transitional periods including developmental ones trigger nostalgia.

   Some newer research is suggesting that there might be a smaller but
--
   nostalgic.

   Luna: Do you think nostalgia has always been a part of the human
   experience?

   Batcho: When I first did literature review in order to put together my
   nostalgia inventory, I was really impressed to find references to
   nostalgia before it ever had the name nostalgia and those references go
   back thousands of years. You can find in literature all kinds of
   examples of people who were in some sense nostalgic for sometimes their
--

   Luna: That's really fascinating. Also can you just-- Now you've touched
   on it a few times, can you explain your nostalgia inventory and how you
   use it in your research?

   Batcho: Yes, because I define nostalgia as a longing for or missing for
   one's personal past, I comprised it of items that asked people to what
   extent they missed something from their past. Some of the items on the
--
   One which is a more concrete set of things that we miss from our past
   and the other being a little more abstract a little more conceptual and
   I argue that nostalgia is an umbrella that covers both of those. My
   inventory measures it in a way that connects people to missing their
   own past and that is not correlated with inventories that look at it
--
   explained that memories can be manipulated under the right conditions.
   What are your thoughts on that and how that can affect our levels of
   nostalgia about the past?

   Batcho: I agree. I agree completely. I think that to some extent, how
--
   nostalgic memories either of that relationship and saying, gee, how did
   we come to this unhappiness when we were so passionately in love in the
   beginning? There are researchers now looking at relationship nostalgia.
   It can be helpful to some extent but on the other hand, if you're using
   it as a way of almost arguing that you want out of the relationship.
--

   Luna: Just to wrap this up for our listeners. We've touched on a lot of
   different areas of nostalgia. I want to know, is there a way for
   society to collectively use nostalgia to better itself? How can we
   tangibly benefit from it?

   Batcho: I think it's really a very important resource and it's
   underutilized. I say that even though we have all these spin-offs and
   reboots and we have a lot of nostalgia. If you use a search engine for
   the term nostalgia, it is incredible. You can find maybe near 300
   million hits on that search engine but just because you have a lot of
   something doesn't mean that you're using it effectively. We could start
--
   parenting.

   One of the healthiest forms of nostalgia throughout human history has
   always been to connect each generation to the next. In that sort of
   bond, you pass down to the next generation, the best of the past. Just
--
   bond so that we can get along with one another better than perhaps some
   people think we're getting along with one another today. Because
   differences can be divisive, nostalgia could be in a way part of the
   cure because nostalgia does the opposite. Instead of dividing, it
   unites.

   Luna: There's a lot of great things that nostalgia can do for us if we
   just hone in on that and try to utilize it as you just mentioned.

--
Download Episode

   Episode 93: Does Nostalgia Have a Psychological Purpose?

   Save the MP3 file linked above to listen to it on your computer or
