   Medically reviewed by Matthew Boland, PhD — By Crystal Raypole on July
   14, 2021
     * Nostalgia and depression
     * Benefits of nostalgia
     * How to cope
     * Finding support
--
   PinterestJoscha Malburg/EyeEm/GettyImages

   Nostalgia refers to those wistful, sentimental feelings that surface
   when you recall significant experiences, relationships, places, and
   other bits of the past.

   Often, nostalgia inspires positive emotions — a sense of meaningfulness
   or life purpose, social connection, and optimism. But it can have a
   downside, too — a lingering aftertaste with an unpleasant bite.
--
Once upon a time

   Experts did consider nostalgia a mental health condition at one point.
   Physician Johannes Hofer first used the term in the late 1600s to
   describe the anxiety, homesickness, disordered eating, insomnia, and
--
   fighting away from home.

   By the 1800s, nostalgia was considered more of a melancholic depression
   tinged with homesickness and loss.
   In the late 1900s, sociologist Fred Davis began to draw clear
   distinctions between nostalgia and homesickness. Others took his work
   further, highlighting nostalgia’s possible consequences and potential
   benefits.

   The link between nostalgia and depression

   A glimpse of a familiar face, the refrain of a long-forgotten song, a
--
Worry and rumination

   Nostalgia might cast a longer shadow if you have a habit of worrying or
   often find yourself fixating on dark and unwanted thoughts.

   A 2012 study explored potential negative effects of nostalgia in a
   sample of over 200 adults. The participants, most of whom were
   university students, answered questions about their:
--
   keep.

   Research from 2020 exploring the effects of nostalgia on well-being
   called nostalgia a “mixed emotion,” one that can have both positive and
   negative effects.

   Through several diary studies, researchers found evidence to suggest
   that nostalgia can sometimes create a cycle of distress:
     * You might notice spontaneous nostalgia as you go about your day,
       especially after unpleasant events, like a fight with your partner
       or a bad day at work.
--
       negative thoughts. Eventually, you could begin to feel sad, even
       somewhat depressed.
     * This distress can, in turn, prompt further nostalgia.

   What’s more, existing feelings of depression or sadness can lay yet
--
Loneliness and loss

   Nostalgia often surfaces when thinking of loved ones, both those you
   haven’t encountered in some time and those you no longer spend time
   with.

   If you lost a friend or loved one and feel like you never got real
   closure, this nostalgia may feel even more distressing.

   Anticipatory nostalgia, or a longing for someone or something you
   haven’t yet lost, can also trigger anxiety and preemptive sadness.

--
   yourself missing them well before they’re gone.

   The upside of nostalgia

   All that being said, nostalgia isn’t always negative. In fact, experts
   have associated it with several positive aspects of emotional
   well-being:
--
       important experiences can remind you that life has value and
       meaning — even if it didn’t turn out exactly how you predicted.
     * Belonging and connection. Nostalgia may sometimes contribute to
       feelings of loneliness, but 2020 research also suggested it can
       help you feel more connected to others. Thinking of the people you
--
       toward goals and improve circumstances you aren’t happy with.

   Nostalgia could even inspire you to get help for depression.

   In a 2020 study, researchers created two different announcements for
   the campus counseling center for 148 university students living with
   depression. One announcement was specifically designed to trigger
   feelings of nostalgia.

   The students who watched the nostalgic announcement reported
--

   Instead of drawing comparisons between “now” and “then,” harnessing
   your nostalgia can help you cultivate gratitude for defining life
   events or people who truly changed your life.

--
Seek out fulfilling relationships

   When nostalgia leads to yearning for lost friends and loved ones, you
   can challenge feelings of loneliness by turning toward the important
   people in your present.
--

   A mental health professional might not diagnose nostalgic depression,
   but they can offer support when nostalgia leads to lingering emotional
   distress.

--
   present.

   Some evidence suggests spontaneous nostalgia, or the recollections that
   come up in daily life, tends to have more of a negative impact than the
   nostalgic feelings that come up when someone asks you to recall a
--
     * recognize potential triggers for these feelings
     * create strategies to counter rumination
     * explore strategies to cope with nostalgia productively
     * identify symptoms of anxiety, depression, or other underlying
       mental health concerns
--
   avoid using tertiary references. You can learn more about how we ensure
   our content is accurate and current by reading our editorial policy.
     * Abeyta AA, et al. (2020). Combating loneliness with nostalgia:
       Nostalgic feelings attenuate negative thoughts and motivations
       associated with loneliness.
       frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01219/full
     * Batcho K. (2019). Speaking of psychology: Does nostalgia have a
       psychological purpose?
       apa.org/research/action/speaking-of-psychology/nostalgia
     * Batcho KI. (2020). When nostalgia tilts to sad: Anticipatory and
       personal nostalgia.
       frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01186/full
     * Bridge DJ, et al. (2012). Neural correlates of reactivation and
       retrieval-induced distortion.
       jneurosci.org/content/32/35/12144
     * Newman DB, et al. (2020). Nostalgia and well-being in daily life:
       An ecological validity perspective.
       ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7513922
     * Hussain SA, et al. (2020). Effect of nostalgia as a motivational
       force for depressed students to seek professional psychological
       help.
--
       ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4927028
     * Routledge C, et al. (2011). The past makes the present meaningful:
       Nostalgia as an existential resource.
       psycnet.apa.org/record/2011-15473-001
     * Routledge C, et al. (2013). Nostalgia as a resource for
       psychological health and well-being.
       psycnet.apa.org/record/2013-38800-004
     * Sedikides C, et al. (2008). Nostalgia: Past, present, and future.
       researchgate.net/publication/313213209_Nostalgia_past_present_and_f
       uture
     * Verplanken B. (2012). When bittersweet turns sour: Adverse effects
       of nostalgia on habitual worriers.
       psych.hanover.edu/Research/exponnetresults/Verplanken%20(2012).pdf
     * Wildschut T, et al. (2008). Nostalgia — From cowbells to the
       meaning of life.
       thepsychologist.bps.org.uk/volume-21/edition-1/nostalgia-cowbells-m
       eaning-life
