   #Admind » Feed Admind » Comments Feed Admind » ’90s nostalgia – how we
   learned to love the unlovable? Comments Feed alternate alternate
   alternate
--
     * Design

’90s nostalgia – how we learned to love the unlovable?

   Author: Maciej Kałuża
--
   Share this article on
   (BUTTON) (BUTTON)
   ’90s nostalgia – how we learned to love the unlovable?

   Until recently, it may have caused a feeling of slight embarrassment
   and distaste. Today, more and more designers are falling for the ’90s
   nostalgia.

   Business was booming. With the fall of the Soviet Union, the threat of
--

   But apparently, it is much less painful for the contemporary soul. So,
   can we actually be feeling nostalgia for the design trends of the
   1990s? Well, the question can’t have any rational answer, because, any
   nostalgic feeling in design trends probably defies the laws of logic,
--
   contrasting colours and oversized letters. We had Anti-design, Grunge,
   Groovival, and Memphis still holding on, and almost everybody thought
   of himself as post-something. So, like any nostalgia, the flashback to
   the 90s can actually relate to very different things and completely
   different foundations of design.
--
   https://pl.pinterest.com/pin/646899933983307999/

Where does the ’90s nostalgia come from?

   It would probably require a lot of research to find out if and why is
--
   because.

   Nostalgia is a powerful and complex feeling. It adds emotion to
   seemingly distant artifacts of the past, which – quite honestly – must
   have had a completely different meaning and context 30 years ago. But
--
   judgment the history of design would produce regarding its aesthetics.

   See how ’90s nostalgia can be seen today:
   youth foria website design in 90s style Source:
   https://youthforia.co/just dance 2022 design - 90s nostalgia Source:
   https://image.api.playstation.com/vulcan/img/rnd/202110/1518/wLMXX745Iy
   3XvuGeL5Z1gChYcaptain marvel - nostalgic website Source:
   https://www.marvel.com/captainmarvel/

How to use nostalgia in brand communication?

   But let’s be less nostalgic for a while and think, what function could
--
   might work from a scientific perspective. According to a study from the
   College of Business and Economics, Washington State University,
   consumers tend to rate nostalgia-themed advertisements better in
   comparison to non-nostalgic ads**. The question could be: why? And I
   guess we come back to my initial suspicion: relating to 90s nostalgia
   makes a lot of sense in the post-pandemic context. We might not be
   tired of all-encompassing usability, minimalism, and pristine
--
   *Yes, I know it sounds bad, but sometimes, instead of overthinking,
   just design a pink cheetah pattern and have fun!
   ** The Power of Reflection: An Empirical Examination of Nostalgia
   Advertising Effects on JSTOR

   Did you enjoy this article? Also checkout our ’80s nostalgia and
   Cyberpunk aesthetic essay.
