<lang="eng">
<page="eng-10">
<text>
   kids remember RCA Records via YouTube

   Anyone who lived through the 1990s shares a fond nostalgia for all
   things associated with the era of frosted tips and Y2K panic. You can
   still practically taste your favorite Lip Smackers flavor, you remember
--
   you were wearing a sneak peek. (And fortunately for those who missed
   out, designers like Tommy Hilfiger are capitalizing on our '90s
   nostalgia and still selling them at stores like Macy's today.)

   11
--
   lightly-pigmented lip balms—which you can still get at Walmart,
   actually—were a must-have for cosmetics enthusiasts in the '90s. The
   scent of the Dr. Pepper lip balm still conjures instant nostalgia for
   kids of this era.

--
   It may have been a silly pop song, but not only do most '90s kids know
   the words to "Barbie Girl" by heart, you probably still get a little
   pang of nostalgia when you hear it today. Truly, it's fantastic.

   43
--
   on celebrity news and health coverage. Read more
   Filed Under
   1990s • Entertainment • Fun Facts • Nostalgia
   Read This Next
     * teenage girls at a party in the 1990s teenage girls at a party in
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-11">
<text>
   FROM THE MAGAZINE

Why Does ’90s Nostalgia Feel So Good Right Now?

   At a moment when life is strictly digital, references to the last
--
   Tommy Hilfiger Party.

   At times, however, the ceaseless nostalgia feedback loop can feel more
   mind-numbing than eye-opening. Simon Rex, the ’90s adult-film twunk
   turned MTV VJ heartthrob, may be earning Oscar buzz at the age of 47
--
   There is no doubt that this endless retro stream offers an escape to a
   time when a car phone was a rare luxury. But the very persistence and
   pervasiveness of today’s mass nostalgia is only possible, of course,
   thanks to the algorithmic engines driving TikTok, Netflix, and other
   Big Tech platforms—in other words, the very same online tar pits we
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-12">
<text>
   #Admind » Feed Admind » Comments Feed Admind » ’90s nostalgia – how we
   learned to love the unlovable? Comments Feed alternate alternate
   alternate
--
     * Design

’90s nostalgia – how we learned to love the unlovable?

   Author: Maciej Kałuża
--
   Share this article on
   (BUTTON) (BUTTON)
   ’90s nostalgia – how we learned to love the unlovable?

   Until recently, it may have caused a feeling of slight embarrassment
   and distaste. Today, more and more designers are falling for the ’90s
   nostalgia.

   Business was booming. With the fall of the Soviet Union, the threat of
--

   But apparently, it is much less painful for the contemporary soul. So,
   can we actually be feeling nostalgia for the design trends of the
   1990s? Well, the question can’t have any rational answer, because, any
   nostalgic feeling in design trends probably defies the laws of logic,
--
   contrasting colours and oversized letters. We had Anti-design, Grunge,
   Groovival, and Memphis still holding on, and almost everybody thought
   of himself as post-something. So, like any nostalgia, the flashback to
   the 90s can actually relate to very different things and completely
   different foundations of design.
--
   https://pl.pinterest.com/pin/646899933983307999/

Where does the ’90s nostalgia come from?

   It would probably require a lot of research to find out if and why is
--
   because.

   Nostalgia is a powerful and complex feeling. It adds emotion to
   seemingly distant artifacts of the past, which – quite honestly – must
   have had a completely different meaning and context 30 years ago. But
--
   judgment the history of design would produce regarding its aesthetics.

   See how ’90s nostalgia can be seen today:
   youth foria website design in 90s style Source:
   https://youthforia.co/just dance 2022 design - 90s nostalgia Source:
   https://image.api.playstation.com/vulcan/img/rnd/202110/1518/wLMXX745Iy
   3XvuGeL5Z1gChYcaptain marvel - nostalgic website Source:
   https://www.marvel.com/captainmarvel/

How to use nostalgia in brand communication?

   But let’s be less nostalgic for a while and think, what function could
--
   might work from a scientific perspective. According to a study from the
   College of Business and Economics, Washington State University,
   consumers tend to rate nostalgia-themed advertisements better in
   comparison to non-nostalgic ads**. The question could be: why? And I
   guess we come back to my initial suspicion: relating to 90s nostalgia
   makes a lot of sense in the post-pandemic context. We might not be
   tired of all-encompassing usability, minimalism, and pristine
--
   *Yes, I know it sounds bad, but sometimes, instead of overthinking,
   just design a pink cheetah pattern and have fun!
   ** The Power of Reflection: An Empirical Examination of Nostalgia
   Advertising Effects on JSTOR

   Did you enjoy this article? Also checkout our ’80s nostalgia and
   Cyberpunk aesthetic essay.

--
   (BUTTON) (BUTTON)

   ’80s nostalgia – the decade that never ended
     * Design

’80s nostalgia – the decade that never ended

   Designing for accessibility – 3 tips from an interaction designer
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-13">
<text>
     * NEWSLETTERSubscribe

Way Back When? The ’90s Nostalgia Boom and Why We All Long for a Simpler Time

   Mike Crisolago | December 5th, 2019
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   90s nostalgia

   Photo: Mark Piovesan via iStock / Getty Images Plus

   The word “nostalgia” evokes images of everything from classic cars to
   Woodstock to bellbottoms, all the way back to the golden age of
   Hollywood. Think James Dean in Rebel Without a Cause, not James Van Der
   Beek in Dawson’s Creek. But the ’90s began 30 years ago, meaning that
   nostalgia for that decade today is akin to nostalgia for the 1970s in
   the year 2000. And no one made a fuss about that.

--
   it’s the millennial generation’s turn.

   The ’90s nostalgia kick began in the early 2010s but gained serious
   traction in recent years, fuelled by total pop culture recall like the
   resurgence of the hit sitcom Friends — thanks to Netflix — including
--
   followers in just over five hours. She currently stands at 21 million
   followers and counting.
   90s nostalgia Jennifer Aniston’s first Instagram post, a current photo
   of the cast of “Friends.” Clockwise from front: Jennifer Aniston, Lisa
   Kudrow, Courteney Cox, Matt LeBlanc, David Schwimmer and Matthew Perry.
--

   Of course, millennials make up close to 65 per cent of Instagram’s user
   base, which explains why ‘90s nostalgia accounts flourish, offering
   users a regular fix of the decade’s cultural headliners, from the
   Britney Spears/Justin Timberlake romance to Kirk Cobain candids to
--
   holiday gift items in 2019.

The 1990s as Nostalgia? As If!

   Rapper Vanilla Ice, 52, who dropped his hit album To the Extreme in
--
   candy wrappers and photos of celebrity crushes. She opened the capsule
   in 2017 and created a viral hit when she shared the contents on
   Instagram, following it up with a podcast about nostalgia and now
   a website, Capsule 98.  It’s dedicated to “the formative objects,
   places and experiences that shape who we are,” regardless of generation
   or decade.
   90s nostalgia A mixtape of popular songs from 1998 that Randi Bergman
   included in her time capsule. It includes “As Long As You Love Me” by
   her favourite group at the time, Backstreet Boys. Photo: Randi
--


   The 34-year-old suggests one reason for the boom in ’90s nostalgia is
   that millennials fully indulge it online in a way that previous
   generations, who didn’t have the internet when they were in their 20s
--
   Bergman may be on to something. In 2013, University of Surrey
   psychologist Erica Hepper told the New York Times that feelings of
   nostalgia actually peak in young adults and again in old age while
   slumping somewhat in the years in between.  “Nostalgia helps us deal
   with transitions,” Hepper said. “The young adults are just moving away
   from home and or starting their first jobs, so they fall back on
   memories of family Christmases, pets and friends in school.”

   For millennials, like other generations, nostalgia serves as a safety
   blanket, a source of comfort and a means of temporary escape from the
   demands of adulthood. The word “nostalgia” itself is a combination of
   two Greek words that mean “homecoming” and “pain.” Or, in other words,
   homesick.

   But Bergman adds that nostalgia also serves another purpose, serving as
   a kind of online shorthand.

--
   doesn’t immediately resonate to her the same way.”

   Another Canadian millennial, Lee Davis, 24, takes the idea of nostalgia
   as communication to the next level with HideSeek, a pop-up he
   co-founded that currently resides in Montreal and courts millennials
--
   and Instagramable.”

   HideSeek is unique in the nostalgia business in that it isn’t pegged to
   specific pop-culture references. Guests tour rooms outfitted with
   elements relatable to all generations: rooms themed around items like
--
   rooms contain oversized items, their massive scale creating a childlike
   sensation for visitors.
   90s nostalgia Visitors enjoy the Salon Slinky at HideSeek. Photo:
   HideSeek/Instagram

--
   “That’s what we really focused on — less about specific nostalgic
   memories and more to create an experience that lets you feel like a
   kid,” Davis says. His idea of nostalgia is centred on the notion of
   “play,” evoking memories of recess or after school sports.

   “Nostalgia’s just so powerful,” he adds. “And I can just see it from
   the customers’ reactions. When they see something that reminds them of
   their past or it makes them feel like kids, they get this warm, gushy
--
   like a kid again? I get to step outside from my normal day-to-day
   routine?’”
   90s nostalgia It’s not just millennials who enjoy the ball pit at
   HideSeek. Photo: HideSeek/Instagram

Beyond ’90s Nostalgia

   At the same time, millennial nostalgia extends beyond the 1990s to
   feeling  fondness for a time they didn’t even experience.

--
   the only way they can experience what their older relatives experienced
   … They see it through their eyes.”
   90s nostalgia Elvis Presley tribute performer Steve Michaels as the
   King of Rock ‘n’ Roll. Photo: Steve Michaels as ELVIS/Facebook


   For Wren, “Nostalgia kicks in when you’re trying to keep a feeling
   alive, keep a memory alive. I think nostalgia’s more of a feeling. It’s
   sometimes not even [attached to] a time frame.” And like nostalgic
   millennials, Wren says that many of the older audience members she
--
   In reality, both baby boomers and millennials yearn for a simpler time.
   The only difference is the decade for which they long. Generational
   preferences aside, though, it turns out that nostalgia is actually good
   for you.

   Clay Routledge, a psychology professor and author of Nostalgia: A
   Psychological Resource, told New Orleans Public Radio in 2017 that
   while people turn to nostalgia in times of stress,  it actually makes
   them more optimistic about the future. He adds that studies “show this
   both in terms of people reporting that they’re more optimistic about
   the future, more inspired but also behaviourally, too, in terms of
   people actually going out and wanting to interact with and meet people
   after they’ve engaged in nostalgia.”

   So ultimately, while decades and generations move on, the human impulse
   to revisit our past for a nostalgic boost remains constant. And that’s
   a good thing, regardless of what you actually consider nostalgia.

   “I feel like everybody connects to nostalgia in a different way,
   whether you’re 90 or you’re 10,” Bergman says. “I think about it all
   the time — what are the things now that we take for granted or that are
--
   RELATED:

   Nostalgia: A Tale of Christmas Past at Eaton’s Toyland

   Nostalgia: A Wartime Recipe for Woolton Pie

   Nostalgia: A Throwback to When Papers Were Delivered by Erstwhile,
   Ink-Stained Kids

   Nostalgia: 50 Years Later, A Look Back At Woodstock
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-14">
<text>
   with the Latin phrase "memoria praeteritorum bonorum", which translates
   into English roughly as "the past is always well remembered".^[1] Rosy
   retrospection is very closely related to the concept of nostalgia. The
   difference between the terms is that rosy retrospection could be
   understood as a cognitive bias, whereas the broader phenomenon of
   nostalgia is not usually seen as based on a biased perspective.

   Although rosy retrospection is a cognitive bias, which distorts a
--
     * Positivity effect
     * Reference class forecasting
     * Nostalgia
     * Declinism
     * Pollyanna principle
--
References[edit]

    1. ^ "The Meaning of Nostalgia". Psychology Today. Retrieved
       2017-04-22.
    2. ^ "A Theory of Temporal Adjustments of the Evaluation of Events"
--
     * Cognitive biases
     * Memory biases
     * Nostalgia

   Hidden categories:
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-15">
<text>

   Home // News &amp; Advocacy // Podcasts // Speaking of Psychology //
   Speaking of Psychology: Does nostalgia...

Speaking of Psychology: Does nostalgia have a psychological purpose?

Episode 93 – Does Nostalgia Have a Psychological Purpose?

   What psychological purpose does nostalgia serve? Is it good or bad? Are
   we more nostalgic today in our hectic, connected world? Is there such a
   thing as the “good ‘ol days”? Here to help explain is Krystine Batcho,
   PhD, professor of psychology at LeMoyne College in Syracuse, New York.
   She’s an expert on nostalgia and developed the Nostalgia Inventory, a
   survey that assesses proneness to personal nostalgia.

About the expert: Krystine Batcho, PhD
--
   research has ranged from early work in human-computer interaction to
   the impact of higher education on the development of moral and social
   responsibility. Her current research on the psychology of nostalgia
   began with her introduction of the Nostalgia Inventory, a survey that
   assesses proneness to personal nostalgia. The Nostalgia Inventory has
   been translated into multiple languages, made available as an app and
   has been used in numerous research studies. Her scholarly publications
--
   host, Kaitlin Luna.

   Nostalgia, that longing feeling for the past when things seemed better,
   easier, and more fun. It's the feeling behind countless number one
   hits. It's what's resurrecting old TV shows and being capitalized on by
   politicians. We all know the feeling. Some of us maybe a little too
   well. What psychological purpose does nostalgia serve? Is it good or
   bad? Are we more nostalgic today in our hectic connected world? Is
   there such a thing as the good old days? Here to help explain is Dr.
   Krystine Batcho, professor of psychology at LeMoyne College in
   Syracuse, New York. She's an expert on nostalgia and develops the
   nostalgia inventory, a survey that assesses proneness to personal
   nostalgia. Welcome, Dr. Batcho.

   Dr. Krystine Batcho: Thank you so much. I love talking about nostalgia.
   Thank you for inviting me.

   Luna: Absolutely. Absolutely, we look forward to hearing all about it.
   As a psychologist and a researcher of nostalgia, how do you describe
   nostalgia?

   Batcho: That's a very important question because today many people are
   researching nostalgia, but they might be using the word differently. In
   fact, some people are probably talking about a slightly different
   experience or construct. I'm pretty faithful to the origins of the word
   nostalgia. The word was coined or invented a long time ago, over 300
   years ago, and originally designated homesickness. Well, semantic drift
   over the centuries has broadened that to the notion of longing for or
   missing aspects of a person's personal lived past. That is the kind of
   nostalgia or that is what I mean when I talk about nostalgia and it's a
   wonderfully complex paradoxical experience.

   Luna: Can you talk about the role of nostalgia in the human psyche. Why
   do we have that feeling?

   Batcho: Most of the research available today including my research
   argues that nostalgia serves a number of functions. The thing that ties
   them all together is that nostalgia is an emotional experience that
   unifies. One example of this is it helps to unite our sense of who we
   are, our self, our identity over time. Because over time we change
   constantly we change in incredible ways. We're not anywhere near the
   same as we were when we were three years old, for example. Nostalgia by
   motivating us to remember the past in our own life helps to unite us to
   that authentic self and remind us of who we have been and then compare
--

   That gives us a sense of who we want to be down the road in the future.
   The other way that nostalgia serves an essential psychological function
   is that it is a highly social emotion. It connects us to other people.
   It does that and so many beautiful ways. In the beginning, when we're
--
   our life, our parents, our siblings, our friends. As we go through
   life, it can broaden out and extend to a wider sphere of the people we
   interact with. It's a social connectedness phenomenon and nostalgia is
   in that sense a very healthy pro-social emotion.

--
   and being able to revisit it and relive it again.

   Luna: You've explained that there's two different kinds of nostalgia.
   There's the personal which we've just touched on and historical. Can
   you explain what each one is?

   Batcho: In fact today, many people are arguing that there are even more
   varieties of nostalgia but when I first began collecting empirical
   evidence in the mid-1990s, I knew that another inventory existed. It
   was put together by a psychologist named Holbrook. That one contained
   items that were more oriented toward history and society across the
   years. That is the type that I refer to as historical nostalgia. The
   evidence shows that someone who experiences historical nostalgia might
   even have an emotional attachment to or longing for times in history
   that predate their own birth. That is very different from personal
   nostalgia.

   Personal nostalgia means that you are longing for or feeling good about
   aspects of your life that you already live through and have stored in
   your memory. My original data, in the beginning, demonstrated that
   individuals can be experiencing a lot of one type of the nostalgia and
   maybe not much of the other. They're relatively non-correlated or
   independent phenomena. They're not the same thing.

   Luna: Your research has shown that nostalgia can be a stabilizing force
   and comfort us during times of change and transition. Can you explain
   that a bit more?
--
   how far that person has come in life.

   In a way, Nostalgia is like a measurement. It's a way we keep track of
   things, we monitor progress through life, not just for ourselves, but
   even for other people to whom we are very attached.
--
   today's political climate where many people are longing to return to
   "the good old days" in the United States. What does this say to you as
   a nostalgia researcher?

   Batcho: It tells me a couple of things. First of all, different people
--
   reasons. Let's say, someone who is old enough to have lived through,
   for example, the 1950s, they might actually be experiencing some
   personal nostalgia because they're remembering how they and their
   family celebrated holidays, or what it was like going to school in the
   mid-1950s. That phenomenon would be very, very different for a younger
   person, for example, a member of the millennial generation. For them,
   it's not personal nostalgia, it's historical. Historical nostalgia, in
   my research, suggests is more likely triggered by dissatisfaction with
   the present.
--
   way, this is a two-edged sword because just as we can idealize and
   romanticize and therefore distort the accuracy of memories, we can go
   in the other direction. One of the reasons I find nostalgia so
   fascinating is because I have an interest in connecting the theoretical
   research in the laboratory to people's lived experiences because of
--
   nostalgic they would be then for those days? The answer to that is much
   more complicated than I thought it would be. I thought that those
   individuals would have the least amount of nostalgia. It turns out that
   it probably depends upon two things.

--
   didn't have enough to eat? Do you remember when somebody was unkind to
   us?" That person is an influence on our memory retrieval processes and
   we're more likely then to experience nostalgia in a negative way. On
   the other hand, if you're hanging out with people who are laughing
   about the funny times and the times when something embarrassing
--
   is missing might be this social connectedness up close and personal. On
   the other hand, it might be that people are losing track of their sense
   of purpose and meaning and the nostalgia, one of its healthiest
   functions is to keep us on track with regard to the meaningfulness of
   our lives.

   Data suggests that nostalgia facilitates our understanding of meaning
   in life and so in a way when we look at all the reboots and people
   going back to the past, it might be telling us that people aren't 100%
--
   while. I don't think it's going to continue on unabated, however.

   Luna: Is there some element of infectiousness to nostalgia? I mean, we
   talked about obviously people have more access to seeing these things
   online and they can share it, but even people, if they're physically
--
   broaden it out a little more.

   Luna: Can this nostalgia be a destructive force that can really
   incubate anger, isolation or hatred? It seems like it could have that
   potential

   Batcho: Most of the research suggests that nostalgia is aligned with or
   correlated with very soft, pro-social emotions such as compassion,
   empathy, altruism. It's unlikely, generally, to be associated with
--
   they were among, were not able to share that.

   What leads ultimately to a healthy kind of nostalgia is the one where
   the positive pro-social aspects of nostalgia can reconnect us now. Not
   just to people in our past but to the people we're dealing with today.
   That is possible, that can happen. All the memoirs that I've studied,
--

   The other aspect of this is that some people are looking at what they
   might refer to as social nostalgia and looking at groups and having
   designs where they're comparing intra-group versus inter-group. In
   those situations, you're perhaps talking about a slightly different
   phenomenon.

   Luna: Can nostalgia hold us back by keeping us dwelling on the past?
   Can it really impede what is happening in the current moment and in the
   future?
--

   I've thought a great deal about this and most of the research I've
   covered it looks like this. Nostalgia is bittersweet. Why did it evolve
   that way? If you take a social evolutionary perspective, it would make
   perfect sense that we would want to revisit our past so that we always
--
   that they're undergoing a very intolerable current situation in their
   life and they might seek counseling to help them deal with that because
   they're using nostalgia then or their memories as an escape. For the
   most part, most people my research shows, because nostalgia is a social
   emotion it is actually correlated with or associated with healthy
   coping mechanisms such as seeking out others when they're having
--
   we're experiencing today so it's generally healthy.

   Luna: How does age affect a person's feelings of nostalgia? Is it
   across the board or is it older or younger people?

   Batcho: My original data set suggested that there is a bump in
   nostalgia where it peaks not in old age as many theorists would have
   expected but peaks in young adulthood. Most theorists argue that the
   reason for that increase in nostalgia during young adulthood is because
   it's such a pivotal developmental transitional period. It is literally
   the time when a person has one foot still back in their childhood and
--
   on because there's a bit over reluctance out of trepidation. Will my
   future be as wonderful and as rosy as my past was? We know that
   transitional periods including developmental ones trigger nostalgia.

   Some newer research is suggesting that there might be a smaller but
--
   nostalgic.

   Luna: Do you think nostalgia has always been a part of the human
   experience?

   Batcho: When I first did literature review in order to put together my
   nostalgia inventory, I was really impressed to find references to
   nostalgia before it ever had the name nostalgia and those references go
   back thousands of years. You can find in literature all kinds of
   examples of people who were in some sense nostalgic for sometimes their
--

   Luna: That's really fascinating. Also can you just-- Now you've touched
   on it a few times, can you explain your nostalgia inventory and how you
   use it in your research?

   Batcho: Yes, because I define nostalgia as a longing for or missing for
   one's personal past, I comprised it of items that asked people to what
   extent they missed something from their past. Some of the items on the
--
   One which is a more concrete set of things that we miss from our past
   and the other being a little more abstract a little more conceptual and
   I argue that nostalgia is an umbrella that covers both of those. My
   inventory measures it in a way that connects people to missing their
   own past and that is not correlated with inventories that look at it
--
   explained that memories can be manipulated under the right conditions.
   What are your thoughts on that and how that can affect our levels of
   nostalgia about the past?

   Batcho: I agree. I agree completely. I think that to some extent, how
--
   nostalgic memories either of that relationship and saying, gee, how did
   we come to this unhappiness when we were so passionately in love in the
   beginning? There are researchers now looking at relationship nostalgia.
   It can be helpful to some extent but on the other hand, if you're using
   it as a way of almost arguing that you want out of the relationship.
--

   Luna: Just to wrap this up for our listeners. We've touched on a lot of
   different areas of nostalgia. I want to know, is there a way for
   society to collectively use nostalgia to better itself? How can we
   tangibly benefit from it?

   Batcho: I think it's really a very important resource and it's
   underutilized. I say that even though we have all these spin-offs and
   reboots and we have a lot of nostalgia. If you use a search engine for
   the term nostalgia, it is incredible. You can find maybe near 300
   million hits on that search engine but just because you have a lot of
   something doesn't mean that you're using it effectively. We could start
--
   parenting.

   One of the healthiest forms of nostalgia throughout human history has
   always been to connect each generation to the next. In that sort of
   bond, you pass down to the next generation, the best of the past. Just
--
   bond so that we can get along with one another better than perhaps some
   people think we're getting along with one another today. Because
   differences can be divisive, nostalgia could be in a way part of the
   cure because nostalgia does the opposite. Instead of dividing, it
   unites.

   Luna: There's a lot of great things that nostalgia can do for us if we
   just hone in on that and try to utilize it as you just mentioned.

--
Download Episode

   Episode 93: Does Nostalgia Have a Psychological Purpose?

   Save the MP3 file linked above to listen to it on your computer or
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-16">
<text>
     * Psychology

We once thought nostalgia was a disease, but it might be key to our survival

   To what end does the brain recall and reward old memories?
--

   Modern neuroscientists and psychologists know that a healthy dose of
   nostalgia is good for you, at least if you’re recalling happy days. But
   there was no sweetness to cut the bitter sensation in 1688, when
   Johannes Hofer coined the word in his medical dissertation. A
--
   health at risk, says Susan J. Matt, a professor of history at Weber
   State University. In the 19th century, doctors debated whether
   nostalgia was a disease in its own right or something that exacerbated
   other conditions common among troops, like dysentery. Either way, they
   believed it could cause irregular heartbeat, fever, and, in rare cases,
   death.

   Our opinion of nostalgia has evolved since then, but the phenomenon
   still eludes understanding. “It’s a very mixed emotion,” says Frederick
   Barrett, a cognitive neuroscientist at Johns Hopkins University. That
--
   treasure, designing a standardized study is difficult.

   But we do know nostalgia has a marked effect on us: Imaging studies
   show us that these experiences have their own neural signature. In
   2016, Barrett reported that meaningful musical cues changed the
--
   University of Southampton in England. Since 2001, he and his colleagues
   have generated a growing body of evidence that individuals more prone
   to nostalgia are generally more likely to socialize, feel empathy, and
   find life meaningful. But their work also suggests a more primitive
   purpose for the feeling: The same neurology that makes us long for
--
   discomfort and pain. In a 2012 study in the journal Emotion,
   Wildschut’s team showed that lower temperatures make us more nostalgic,
   and that nostalgia makes us feel toasty even when we’re objectively
   colder—a bit of magical thinking that could help people persevere in
   situations that might otherwise feel hopeless. If remembering the
--
   Scientists need a lot more information to adequately characterize this
   complex and bittersweet human sentiment. But while centuries of doctors
   considered nostalgia a deadly disease, we now know how wrong they were:
   Our longing for a lost time can help us make it through today.
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-17">
<text>
   Uncategorized

Historical Nostalgia

   Written by Rachel Van Zeumeren on April 9, 2015
--
   Many people are particularly attracted to the past, and, for some, the
   feeling is so strong that they feel as though they were born into the
   wrong generation. Historical nostalgia is a yearning for a time in the
   past that you have not actually experienced; but is it the allure of
   the past that causes nostalgia, or is it a result of dissatisfaction
   with the present?

--
   romantic feeling about a time we have never experienced ourselves.

   Psychologists have studied nostalgia through Woody Allen’s film
   Midnight in Paris. They come to the conclusion that the film uses
   historical nostalgia to tell a story about coping with the present. In
   the film, the main character Gil, played by Owen Wilson, leaves the
   unsatisfying present and travels to 1920s Paris, where he spends time
--

   Jennifer Yalouf, a doctoral student in clinical psychology at the
   Massachusetts School of Professional Psychology, thinks nostalgia can
   be interpreted as a type of fantasy, and fantasy is generally thought
   of as a defense mechanism that allows someone to block out the bad in
   the present. For Yalouf, historical nostalgia is a form of escapism,
   because people turn to the past to escape in many ways, from
   participating in historical re-enactments to reading books, listening
   to music, or watching movies from bygone times.

   Woody Allen often uses nostalgia as a theme, as seen in Manhattan and
   Radio Days, but the films come to a realization that the good old days
   were not as good as one might think. In Midnight in Paris, Gil realizes
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-18">
<text>
   https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01186

When Nostalgia Tilts to Sad: Anticipatory and Personal Nostalgia

   Krystine I. Batcho^*
     * Le Moyne College, Syracuse, NY, United States

   Contemporary research has showcased many benefits of nostalgia, but its
   bittersweet character and historical reputation as unhealthy raise the
   possibility of less favorable impacts. In recent studies, daily diary
   data highlighted nostalgia’s mixed valence and suggested that nostalgia
   is more strongly associated with negative feelings. Variables that
   influence the adaptive or maladaptive dimensions of nostalgia have not
   yet been fully explored. Recently, a focus on when nostalgia is
   experienced relative to past and future was introduced in the construct
   of anticipatory nostalgia, missing the present prematurely before it
   has become past. Distinct from personal nostalgia, anticipatory
   nostalgia was found to be characterized by difficulty enjoying the
   present and a tendency toward sadness and worry. The present study
   examines the distinctive dynamics at play in anticipatory and personal
   nostalgia by exploring the relationship between each type of
   dispositional nostalgia and reported experience with happy and sad
   stories. The Nostalgia Inventory, the Survey of Anticipatory Nostalgia,
   and a brief form of the PANAS were completed by 144 undergraduates (110
   women), who rated their exposure and reactions to happy and sad
   stories. Reported frequency of exposure to happy and sad stories was
   related to dispositional happiness and sadness. Personal and
   anticipatory nostalgia did not differ in frequency of exposure to happy
   and sad stories, but they did differ in reactivity to and learning from
   sad stories. Findings highlight the importance of the timing of
   nostalgia, consistent with the distinction between nostalgia for the
   past and nostalgia for what is still present.

Introduction

   In contrast to nostalgia’s dark origins in medical history as a disease
   construct, contemporary researchers have largely rediscovered nostalgia
   as a healthy psychological phenomenon. Empirical evidence has
   contradicted historical arguments that nostalgia reflects an inability
   to accept the loss of the past or serves as an obstacle to living in
   the present or moving forward (Werman, 1977; Kaplan, 1984, 1987).
--

   However, recent research has revived questions about possible
   unfavorable aspects of nostalgia by highlighting its distinctive
   bittersweet nature (Larsen et al., 2001; Larsen and McGraw, 2011, 2014;
   Hepper et al., 2012). While most studies have found that nostalgia
   increases positive affect, instances of elevated negative affect,
   including sadness, have been identified (Zinchenko, 2011; Stephan et
   al., 2012; Newman et al., 2019). The extent to which nostalgia is
   uplifting and helpful or bitter and counterproductive might depend upon
   personality traits or contextual variables (Barrett et al., 2010;
   Köneke, 2010; Wildschut et al., 2010, 2019; Hart et al., 2011; Iyer and
   Jetten, 2011; Seehusen et al., 2013; Abeyta et al., 2014; Garrido,
   2018). One largely unexplored variable is the timing of nostalgia
   (Batcho, 2020). As an experience that unfolds over time, nostalgia’s
   impact might depend upon the cognitive appraisal that directs the
   feelings and thoughts generated during a nostalgic episode.

   When nostalgia focuses on loss that has not yet occurred, the sadness
   of anticipated loss is premature and the experience becomes a
   paradoxical phenomenon of enjoying the present while missing it as if
   already relegated to the past. Dubbed anticipatory nostalgia, such
   premature nostalgia has been introduced as a construct in its own right
   (Batcho and Shikh, 2016; Bergs et al., 2019). A form of nostalgia by
   definition, it can be distinguished from personal nostalgia. Personal
   nostalgia is missing what has been lost, whereas anticipatory nostalgia
   involves missing what has not yet been lost. Anticipatory nostalgia
   depends upon mentally creating an imagined future that gives rise to
   missing what will be “someday past,” yet still present. By engaging
   abstract construal, anticipatory nostalgia might engender psychological
   distance from the present, decreasing direct involvement in the current
   concrete reality (Nussbaum et al., 2003).

   Anticipatory nostalgia should not be confused with anticipated
   nostalgia. Anticipated nostalgia is the prediction or expectation that
   one will feel nostalgic for an aspect of the present in the future, not
   feeling nostalgic in the present. Predicting future nostalgia is an
   interesting cognitive process but not identical to the emotional
   phenomenon of feeling nostalgic before the future loss occurs. A person
   can expect to miss a loved one when they leave or die someday, but the
   expectation doesn’t necessarily include the emotional component of
   nostalgic missing. Expecting future nostalgia has been shown to predict
   nostalgia after an important life transition. The finding of a greater
   likelihood of expecting future nostalgia for more positive experiences
   is not surprising, as people would be likely to expect to miss
   enjoyable or valued events. Expecting future nostalgia was associated
   with greater savoring of the experience, and post-transition nostalgia
   was associated with benefits, including enhanced self-esteem, social
   connectedness, and meaning in life (Cheung et al., 2019).

   By contrast, it is not clear whether anticipatory nostalgia, premature
   missing of what is still present, shares the benefits of nostalgia for
   the past. Despite eliciting the sadness of loss, anticipatory nostalgia
   might also allow reappraisal of the present. In spite of or because of
   the sadness, anticipating loss during adversity might encourage
--
   present and providing the comfort of knowing that difficulties will not
   last. Initial empirical investigations to identify the benefits or
   disadvantages of anticipatory nostalgia assessed anticipatory nostalgia
   as a dispositional trait, that is, as the tendency of individuals to
   experience it generally. The early studies supported the viability of
   anticipatory nostalgia as a construct distinguishable from personal
   nostalgia (Batcho and Shikh, 2016). Unlike dispositional personal
   nostalgia, dispositional anticipatory nostalgia was characterized by a
   greater tendency for people and experiences to cause worry and sadness
   and was more likely to occur in adverse circumstances.

   The present study extends the early research by exploring the
   relationship between nostalgia and experience with stories. A
   substantial amount of the existing research on nostalgia has examined
   memories. Like memories, stories entail the past inherently by
   recounting what has happened in the past. Stories differ from memories
--
   (Pratt and Fiese, 2004; Kiser et al., 2010). In their memoirs, members
   of the resistance during World War II explained how stories encountered
   during childhood generated nostalgia and played pivotal roles in their
   dedication to the resistance, even to the point of enduring hardships
   and risking death (Batcho, 2018).
--
   The present work introduced a focus on accumulated exposure to stories
   over time. In an investigation of the relationship between overall
   exposure to stories and personal and anticipatory nostalgia,
   participants estimated and shared their experience with happy and sad
   stories. If experiencing nostalgia prematurely is less adaptive than
   missing what is already past, anticipatory nostalgia will be aligned
   with unfavorable reactions to stories, whereas personal nostalgia will
   be associated with positive reactions. In particular, exposure to happy
   and sad stories was examined to explore whether dispositional
   anticipatory nostalgia is associated with greater exposure, reactivity,
   or attraction to sad stories. If the association of anticipatory
   nostalgia with sadness reflects an overall sad disposition,
   anticipatory nostalgia would be expected to correlate with greater
   exposure to or recall of sad stories. If anticipatory nostalgia
   develops in response to sad experiences, reported exposure to sad
   stories would be expected to correlate with anticipatory nostalgia.
   However, prior research has not examined the possibility of cognitive
   benefits. If anticipating future loss entails helpful cognitive
   processing, anticipatory nostalgia will be associated with greater
   likelihood of learning from sad stories.

--
   the college Institutional Review Board for compliance with ethical
   guidelines. In small groups in a laboratory room, participants
   completed paper forms of the Nostalgia Inventory, the Survey of
   Anticipatory Nostalgia, selected items from Watson and Clark’s (1994)
   Positive and Negative Affect Schedule-Expanded Form (PANAS-X), and a
   survey of experience with happy and sad stories constructed for this
   study.

   The Nostalgia Inventory assessed personal nostalgia as a dispositional
   trait (Batcho, 1995, 1998, 2007). Consistent with Stern’s (1992)
   definition of nostalgia as the longing for one’s past, respondents rate
   the extent to which they miss each of 20 items from when they were
   younger on a 9-point scale (1 = Not at all, 9 = Very much). The
--
   (Batcho et al., 2008), and test-retest reliability of 0.82 over a
   4-week interval (Batcho et al., 2011). Consistent with prior research,
   the Nostalgia Inventory yielded an acceptable level of internal
   consistency of 0.88 as measured by Cronbach’s alpha and a split-half
   reliability of 0.81 in this study.

   The Survey of Anticipatory Nostalgia focuses on future loss rather than
   the past (e.g., “society will change”). Given a 9-point scale (1 =
   rarely/not very, 9 = very often/very much), respondents were
--

   As in prior research (Batcho and Shikh, 2016), mean ratings on the
   Nostalgia Inventory correlated moderately with mean ratings on the
   Survey of Anticipatory Nostalgia, r[(][142][)] = 0.52, p <lt; 0.001.

   The Survey of Experience with Stories (Appendix) included eight items
--
Gender

   Men and women did not differ in average personal nostalgia scores, t(1,
   142) = −1.768, p = 0.084, η[p]^2 = 0.029, but women (M = 6.00, SD =
   1.18) scored higher in anticipatory nostalgia than did men (M = 5.24,
   SD = 1.20), t(1, 142) = −3.29, p = 0.001, η[p]^2 = 0.071.

Nostalgia and Positive and Negative Affect

   Ratings of PANAS-X items of generalized affect yielded additional
   evidence for anticipatory nostalgia as a distinct construct. Ratings
   from the three items cheerful, happy, and joyful were averaged to yield
   a composite measure of a tendency toward happiness. Ratings from the
   three items sad, blue, and downhearted were averaged to serve as a
   measure of sadness. Personal nostalgia was not correlated with
   happiness, r[(][142][)] = 0.06, p = 0.476, or sadness, r[(][142][)] =
   0.12, p = 0.136, whereas anticipatory nostalgia correlated
   significantly with sadness, r[(][142][)] = 0.21, p = 0.012, but not
   with happiness, r[(][142][)] = 0.14, p = 0.087.
--
Stories

Nostalgia and Experience With Happy and Sad Stories

   The relationship of personal and anticipatory nostalgia to exposure and
   reactions to happy and sad stories was explored in correlational
   analyses, with gender and dispositional sadness and happiness
--
   number of stories recalled were not correlated for happy stories,
   r[(][142][)] = 0.01, p = 0.922, or sad stories, r[(][142][)] = 0.11, p
   = 0.197, and served as independent measures. Neither type of nostalgia
   correlated significantly with either indicator of frequency of exposure
   to happy and sad stories, suggesting that people prone to personal or
   anticipatory nostalgia have not experienced happy and sad stories more
   or less often. Attraction to or preference for sad or happy stories was
   assessed by asking participants to rate how often they choose happy and
   sad stories. Neither type of nostalgia correlated significantly with
   story choice, suggesting that proneness to personal or anticipatory
   nostalgia does not reflect an underlying bias or preference for happy
   or sad material.
   TABLE 1
   www.frontiersin.org

   Table 1. Partial correlations of personal and anticipatory nostalgia
   with exposure and reactions to stories with gender and dispositional
   happiness and sadness controlled.
--
   However, ratings suggested that they react differently to happy and sad
   stories emotionally and cognitively. Emotionally, personal and
   anticipatory nostalgia both correlated with sadness induced by sad
   stories, but only personal nostalgia correlated significantly with
   happiness elicited by happy stories. Results suggested that personal
   and anticipatory nostalgia differed in cognitive engagement with
   stories. Personal nostalgia correlated with learning from happy
   stories, whereas anticipatory nostalgia correlated with learning from
   sad stories. Consistent with prior findings of an association between
   anticipatory nostalgia and a tendency to be made sad by people and
   events, these results suggested that people prone to anticipatory
   nostalgia may be less reactive to happy stories. Present findings
   suggested that people prone to anticipatory nostalgia process sad
   stories in more productive ways, whereas people prone to personal
   nostalgia are more reactive to happy stories and process happy stories
   in beneficial ways.

Contributions of Nostalgia and Stories to Mood

   The contributions of nostalgia and stories to dispositional mood were
   explored further in linear regression analyses (Table 2). The composite
   happiness ratings were examined in a linear regression analysis, with
   gender and mean ratings from the Nostalgia Inventory and the Survey of
   Anticipatory Nostalgia independent variables. The role of stories was
   explored with the inclusion of mean ratings of frequency of exposure to
   happy and sad stories, degree of happiness (sadness) induced by happy
--

   In a significant model, F(9, 133) = 5.53, p <lt; 0.001, Adjusted R^2 =
   0.223, gender, personal nostalgia, and anticipatory nostalgia were not
   significant. Dispositional happiness was predicted by the frequency of
   exposure to happy, but not sad stories. Similarly, happiness was
--
   A parallel analysis was conducted with the composite sadness ratings as
   the dependent variable. In a significant model, F(9, 133) = 1.92, p =
   0.05, Adjusted R^2 = 0.055, gender, personal nostalgia, and
   anticipatory nostalgia were not significant. Dispositional sadness was
   predicted by the frequency of exposure to sad, but not happy stories.
   However, sadness was not predicted by the sadness elicited by sad
--
   This study introduced a focus on stories as a vehicle for comparing
   emotional and cognitive reactions to cumulative meaningful experiences
   associated with personal and anticipatory nostalgia. Not allowing
   causal relationships to be determined, this exploratory study
   encourages future research based on experimental designs to identify
   variables responsible for the differences between personal and
   anticipatory nostalgia. Further research is needed also to explore
   participant variables in samples characterized by broader demographic
   and diversity constituents.

   A fuller understanding of adaptive functions of nostalgia would be
   advanced with studies that identify the nature and content of the
   stories participants prone to personal or anticipatory nostalgia were
   exposed to and remember. Similarly, future work is needed to determine
   how those prone to nostalgia learn or benefit from happy or sad
   stories. Qualitative analyses of the impactful stories can yield
   insights into the nature of the lessons acquired.
--
Discussion

   The present findings reinforced the importance of when nostalgia is
   felt relative to past and future. Results are consistent with the view
   of anticipatory nostalgia as distinguishable from personal nostalgia
   and worthy of further research as a distinct phenomenon. Stories were
   shown to be effective material for elucidating the roles of emotional
   and cognitive processes in personal and anticipatory nostalgia.
   Exploring reactions to stories can clarify the adaptive and maladaptive
   functions of nostalgia within a meaningful practical context. Access to
   24 h news cycles and online venues have expanded the influence of the
   content and format of stories. The current findings highlight the
--
   the listener or viewer.

   Pertinent to the current study, personal and anticipatory nostalgia
   were distinguished by different ways of interacting with stories. There
   was no evidence that differential exposure to happy and sad stories
   accounted for the distinction. Personal and anticipatory nostalgia both
   correlated with being made sad by sad stories, suggesting that
   participants prone to anticipatory nostalgia are not more sensitive to
   sad stories. However, only personal nostalgia was associated with being
   made happy by happy stories, suggesting that anticipatory nostalgia may
   be associated with less reactivity to happy stories. Furthermore,
   personal nostalgia was related to greater likelihood of learning from
   happy stories, whereas anticipatory nostalgia was associated with
   greater likelihood of learning from sad stories.

   Prior research differentiated personal and anticipatory nostalgia by
   their relationships to happiness and sadness. Personal and anticipatory
   nostalgia both include missing, longing or yearning. In personal
   nostalgia, we enjoy valued aspects of our past again, thereby enjoying
   them twice. In anticipatory nostalgia, we have only the present to
   enjoy them. In fact, we feel the sadness of missing them twice, once in
   the actual present and once in the imagined future. Envisioning what
   the future might bring can be accompanied by sadness missing the
   present and worry about what will come next. In prior research,
   participants prone to anticipatory nostalgia had reported a greater
   tendency for people and experiences to cause them worry and sadness,
   but anticipatory nostalgia did not predict generalized sadness.
   Consistent with prior research, anticipatory nostalgia did not
   contribute to generalized sadness in this study, suggesting that people
   prone to anticipatory nostalgia are not generally unhappy.

   Given that personal and anticipatory nostalgia are both emotional
   constructs, theorists are justified in comparing their emotional
   facets. The present findings highlight the wisdom of considering also
   the cognitive dynamics in the relationship of nostalgia to the impact
   of stories. Rather than generally unhappy, people prone to anticipatory
   nostalgia may be more likely to benefit from sad stories by learning
   ways of coping with current or future problems and anxiety. Their
   inclination to imagine the future as present may reflect conceptual
--
   lives. It remains for future investigations to identify the variables
   or conditions underlying the emotional and cognitive dynamics that
   distinguish personal from anticipatory nostalgia.

   The present findings encourage further research to determine the
   long-term effects of being immersed in happy or sad stories. The
   relationship of learning from sad stories with anticipatory nostalgia
   suggests that benefiting from stories may be facilitated by an ability
   to imagine how the survival or resolution of sadness in a story might
--
   consolation. But looking ahead brings the sad realization that the good
   of the present might be gone too. Future research is needed to
   determine if anticipatory nostalgia can be constructive in certain
   circumstances or applied therapeutically to remind people that time and
   the opportunity to be engaged in the present is fleeting. Sad stories
   may provide opportunities to deal with adversity safely from a
   distance, as anticipatory nostalgia allows loss to be confronted from a
   temporal distance.

--
   cognitive-emotional resources to buffer adverse outcomes. While sadness
   might be considered a maladaptive affective dimension of anticipatory
   nostalgia, the benefits of learning from sad material may suggest there
   are untapped adaptive cognitive functions of anticipatory nostalgia.

Data Availability Statement
--

   Barrett, F. S., Grimm, K. J., Robins, R. W., Wildschut, T., Sedikides,
   C., and Janata, P. (2010). Music-evoked nostalgia: affect, memory, and
   personality. Emotion 10, 390–403. doi: 10.1037/a0019006

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Batcho, K. I. (1995). Nostalgia: a psychological perspective. Percept.
   Mot. Skills 80, 131–143. doi: 10.2466/pms.1995.80.1.131

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Batcho, K. I. (1998). Personal nostalgia, world view, memory, and
   emotionality. Percept. Mot. Skills 87, 411–432. doi:
   10.2466/pms.1998.87.2.411
--
   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Batcho, K. I. (2007). Nostalgia and the emotional tone and content of
   song lyrics. Am. J. Psychol. 120, 361–381.

   PubMed Abstract | Google Scholar

   Batcho, K. I. (2013). Nostalgia: retreat or support in difficult times?
   Am. J. Psychol. 126, 355–367.

   PubMed Abstract | Google Scholar

   Batcho, K. I. (2018). The role of nostalgia in resistance: a
   psychological perspective. Qual. Res. Psychol. 2018:1499835. doi:
   10.1080/14780887.2018.1499835
--
   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Batcho, K. I. (2020). “Nostalgia: the paradoxical bittersweet emotion,”
   in Nostalgia Now: Cross-Disciplinary Perspectives on the Past in the
   Present, ed. M. H. Jacobsen (Abingdon: Routledge), 31–46. doi:
   10.4324/9780429287602-1
--

   Batcho, K. I., DaRin, M. L., Nave, A. M., and Yaworsky, R. R. (2008).
   Nostalgia and identity in song lyrics. Psychol. Aesthet. Creat. Arts 2,
   236–244. doi: 10.1037/1931-3896.2.4.236

--
   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Batcho, K. I., and Shikh, S. (2016). Anticipatory nostalgia: missing
   the present before it’s gone. Pers. Individ. Differ. 98, 75–84. doi:
   10.1016/j.paid.2016.03.088
--

   Bergs, Y., Mitas, O., Smit, B., and Nawijn, J. (2019). Anticipatory
   nostalgia in experience design. Curr. Issues Tour. 2019:1669539. doi:
   10.1080/13683500.2019.1669539

--

   Cheung, W. Y., Hepper, E. G., Reid, C. A., Green, J. D., Wildschut, T.,
   and Sedikides, C. (2019). Anticipated nostalgia: looking forward to
   looking back. Cogn. Emot. 2019:1649247. doi:
   10.1080/02699931.2019.1649247
--

   Cheung, W. Y., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Hepper, E. G., Arndt, J.,
   and Vingerhoets, A. J. (2013). Back to the future: Nostalgia increases
   optimism. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 39, 1484–1496. doi:
   10.1177/0146167213499187
--

   Garrido, S. (2018). The influence of personality and coping style on
   the affective outcomes of nostalgia: is nostalgia a healthy coping
   mechanism or rumination? Pers. Individ. Differ. 120, 259–264. doi:
   10.1016/j.paid.2016.07.021
--

   Hepper, E. G., Ritchie, T. D., Sedikides, C., and Wildschut, T. (2012).
   Odyssey’s end: lay conceptions of nostalgia reflect its original
   Homeric meaning. Emotion 12, 102–119. doi: 10.1037/a0025167

--

   Iyer, A., and Jetten, J. (2011). What’s left behind: identity
   continuity moderates the effect of nostalgia on well-being and life
   choices. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 101, 94–108. doi: 10.1037/a0022496

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Kaplan, H. A. (1987). The psychopathology of nostalgia. Psychoanal.
   Rev. 74, 465–486.

--
   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Köneke, V. (2010). Nostalgia: More Bitter than Sweet. Munich: GRIN,
   doi: 10.3239/9783640942107

--

   Newman, D. B., Sachs, M. E., Stone, A. A., and Schwarz, N. (2019).
   Nostalgia and well-being in daily life: an ecological validity
   perspective. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 118, 325–347. doi:
   10.1037/pspp0000236
--

   Routledge, C., Arndt, J., Sedikides, C., and Wildschut, T. (2008). A
   blast from the past: the terror management function of nostalgia. J.
   Exp. Soc. Psychol. 44, 132–140. doi: 10.1016/j.jesp.2006.11.001

--

   Sedikides, C., Wildschut, T., Routledge, C., and Arndt, J. (2015).
   Nostalgia counteracts self-discontinuity and restores self-continuity.
   Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 45, 52–61. doi: 10.1002/ejsp.2073

--

   Seehusen, J., Cordaro, F., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Routledge, C.,
   Blackhart, G. C., et al. (2013). Individual differences in nostalgia
   proneness: the integrating role of the need to belong. Pers. Individ.
   Differ. 55, 904–908. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2013.07.020
--

   Stephan, E., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Zhou, X., He, W., Routledge,
   C., et al. (2014). The mnemonic mover: Nostalgia regulates avoidance
   and approach motivation. Emotion 14, 545–561. doi: 10.1037/a0035673

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Stern, B. B. (1992). Historical and personal nostalgia in advertising
   text: the Fin de siecle effect. J. Advertising 21, 11–22. doi:
   10.1080/00913367.1992.10673382
--
   Google Scholar

   Werman, D. S. (1977). Normal and pathological nostalgia. J. Am.
   Psychoanal. Assoc. 25, 387–398. doi: 10.1177/000306517702500205

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., and Alowidy, D. (2019). Hanin: Nostalgia
   among Syrian refugees. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 49, 1368–1384. doi:
   10.1002/ejsp.2590
--

   Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Arndt, J., and Routledge, C. (2006).
   Nostalgia: content, triggers, functions. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 91,
   975–993. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.91.5.975

--

   Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Routledge, C., Arndt, J., and Cordaro, F.
   (2010). Nostalgia as a repository of social connectedness: the role of
   attachment-related avoidance. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 98, 573–586. doi:
   10.1037/a0017597
--

   Zhou, X., Sedikides, C., Wildschut, T., and Gao, D. (2008).
   Counteracting loneliness: on the restorative function of nostalgia.
   Psychol. Sci. 19, 1023–1029. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02194.x

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Zinchenko, A. V. (2011). Nostalgia: dialogue between memory and
   knowing. J. Russ. East Eur. Psychol. 49, 84–97. doi:
   10.2753/rpo1061-0405490306
--
   How often do you think you benefit or learn from a sad story?

   Keywords: personal nostalgia, anticipatory nostalgia, stories,
   personality, emotion

   Citation: Batcho KI (2020) When Nostalgia Tilts to Sad: Anticipatory
   and Personal Nostalgia. Front. Psychol. 11:1186. doi:
   10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01186

--
This article is part of the Research Topic

   Current Issues in Nostalgia Research
   View all 13 Articles
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-19">
<text>
   PMID: 32547466

When Nostalgia Tilts to Sad: Anticipatory and Personal Nostalgia

   Krystine I. Batcho^*
--
Abstract

   Contemporary research has showcased many benefits of nostalgia, but its
   bittersweet character and historical reputation as unhealthy raise the
   possibility of less favorable impacts. In recent studies, daily diary
   data highlighted nostalgia's mixed valence and suggested that nostalgia
   is more strongly associated with negative feelings. Variables that
   influence the adaptive or maladaptive dimensions of nostalgia have not
   yet been fully explored. Recently, a focus on when nostalgia is
   experienced relative to past and future was introduced in the construct
   of anticipatory nostalgia, missing the present prematurely before it
   has become past. Distinct from personal nostalgia, anticipatory
   nostalgia was found to be characterized by difficulty enjoying the
   present and a tendency toward sadness and worry. The present study
   examines the distinctive dynamics at play in anticipatory and personal
   nostalgia by exploring the relationship between each type of
   dispositional nostalgia and reported experience with happy and sad
   stories. The Nostalgia Inventory, the Survey of Anticipatory Nostalgia,
   and a brief form of the PANAS were completed by 144 undergraduates (110
   women), who rated their exposure and reactions to happy and sad
   stories. Reported frequency of exposure to happy and sad stories was
   related to dispositional happiness and sadness. Personal and
   anticipatory nostalgia did not differ in frequency of exposure to happy
   and sad stories, but they did differ in reactivity to and learning from
   sad stories. Findings highlight the importance of the timing of
   nostalgia, consistent with the distinction between nostalgia for the
   past and nostalgia for what is still present.
   Keywords: personal nostalgia, anticipatory nostalgia, stories,
   personality, emotion

Introduction

   In contrast to nostalgia's dark origins in medical history as a disease
   construct, contemporary researchers have largely rediscovered nostalgia
   as a healthy psychological phenomenon. Empirical evidence has
   contradicted historical arguments that nostalgia reflects an inability
   to accept the loss of the past or serves as an obstacle to living in
   the present or moving forward (Werman, 1977; Kaplan, 1984, 1987).
--

   However, recent research has revived questions about possible
   unfavorable aspects of nostalgia by highlighting its distinctive
   bittersweet nature (Larsen et al., 2001; Larsen and McGraw, 2011, 2014;
   Hepper et al., 2012). While most studies have found that nostalgia
   increases positive affect, instances of elevated negative affect,
   including sadness, have been identified (Zinchenko, 2011; Stephan et
   al., 2012; Newman et al., 2019). The extent to which nostalgia is
   uplifting and helpful or bitter and counterproductive might depend upon
   personality traits or contextual variables (Barrett et al., 2010;
   Koneke, 2010; Wildschut et al., 2010, 2019; Hart et al., 2011; Iyer and
   Jetten, 2011; Seehusen et al., 2013; Abeyta et al., 2014; Garrido,
   2018). One largely unexplored variable is the timing of nostalgia
   (Batcho, 2020). As an experience that unfolds over time, nostalgia's
   impact might depend upon the cognitive appraisal that directs the
   feelings and thoughts generated during a nostalgic episode.

   When nostalgia focuses on loss that has not yet occurred, the sadness
   of anticipated loss is premature and the experience becomes a
   paradoxical phenomenon of enjoying the present while missing it as if
   already relegated to the past. Dubbed anticipatory nostalgia, such
   premature nostalgia has been introduced as a construct in its own right
   (Batcho and Shikh, 2016; Bergs et al., 2019). A form of nostalgia by
   definition, it can be distinguished from personal nostalgia. Personal
   nostalgia is missing what has been lost, whereas anticipatory nostalgia
   involves missing what has not yet been lost. Anticipatory nostalgia
   depends upon mentally creating an imagined future that gives rise to
   missing what will be "someday past," yet still present. By engaging
   abstract construal, anticipatory nostalgia might engender psychological
   distance from the present, decreasing direct involvement in the current
   concrete reality (Nussbaum et al., 2003).

   Anticipatory nostalgia should not be confused with anticipated
   nostalgia. Anticipated nostalgia is the prediction or expectation that
   one will feel nostalgic for an aspect of the present in the future, not
   feeling nostalgic in the present. Predicting future nostalgia is an
   interesting cognitive process but not identical to the emotional
   phenomenon of feeling nostalgic before the future loss occurs. A person
   can expect to miss a loved one when they leave or die someday, but the
   expectation doesn't necessarily include the emotional component of
   nostalgic missing. Expecting future nostalgia has been shown to predict
   nostalgia after an important life transition. The finding of a greater
   likelihood of expecting future nostalgia for more positive experiences
   is not surprising, as people would be likely to expect to miss
   enjoyable or valued events. Expecting future nostalgia was associated
   with greater savoring of the experience, and post-transition nostalgia
   was associated with benefits, including enhanced self-esteem, social
   connectedness, and meaning in life (Cheung et al., 2019).

   By contrast, it is not clear whether anticipatory nostalgia, premature
   missing of what is still present, shares the benefits of nostalgia for
   the past. Despite eliciting the sadness of loss, anticipatory nostalgia
   might also allow reappraisal of the present. In spite of or because of
   the sadness, anticipating loss during adversity might encourage
--
   present and providing the comfort of knowing that difficulties will not
   last. Initial empirical investigations to identify the benefits or
   disadvantages of anticipatory nostalgia assessed anticipatory nostalgia
   as a dispositional trait, that is, as the tendency of individuals to
   experience it generally. The early studies supported the viability of
   anticipatory nostalgia as a construct distinguishable from personal
   nostalgia (Batcho and Shikh, 2016). Unlike dispositional personal
   nostalgia, dispositional anticipatory nostalgia was characterized by a
   greater tendency for people and experiences to cause worry and sadness
   and was more likely to occur in adverse circumstances.

   The present study extends the early research by exploring the
   relationship between nostalgia and experience with stories. A
   substantial amount of the existing research on nostalgia has examined
   memories. Like memories, stories entail the past inherently by
   recounting what has happened in the past. Stories differ from memories
--
   (Pratt and Fiese, 2004; Kiser et al., 2010). In their memoirs, members
   of the resistance during World War II explained how stories encountered
   during childhood generated nostalgia and played pivotal roles in their
   dedication to the resistance, even to the point of enduring hardships
   and risking death (Batcho, 2018).
--
   The present work introduced a focus on accumulated exposure to stories
   over time. In an investigation of the relationship between overall
   exposure to stories and personal and anticipatory nostalgia,
   participants estimated and shared their experience with happy and sad
   stories. If experiencing nostalgia prematurely is less adaptive than
   missing what is already past, anticipatory nostalgia will be aligned
   with unfavorable reactions to stories, whereas personal nostalgia will
   be associated with positive reactions. In particular, exposure to happy
   and sad stories was examined to explore whether dispositional
   anticipatory nostalgia is associated with greater exposure, reactivity,
   or attraction to sad stories. If the association of anticipatory
   nostalgia with sadness reflects an overall sad disposition,
   anticipatory nostalgia would be expected to correlate with greater
   exposure to or recall of sad stories. If anticipatory nostalgia
   develops in response to sad experiences, reported exposure to sad
   stories would be expected to correlate with anticipatory nostalgia.
   However, prior research has not examined the possibility of cognitive
   benefits. If anticipating future loss entails helpful cognitive
   processing, anticipatory nostalgia will be associated with greater
   likelihood of learning from sad stories.

--
   the college Institutional Review Board for compliance with ethical
   guidelines. In small groups in a laboratory room, participants
   completed paper forms of the Nostalgia Inventory, the Survey of
   Anticipatory Nostalgia, selected items from Watson and Clark's (1994)
   Positive and Negative Affect Schedule-Expanded Form (PANAS-X), and a
   survey of experience with happy and sad stories constructed for this
   study.

   The Nostalgia Inventory assessed personal nostalgia as a dispositional
   trait (Batcho, 1995, 1998, 2007). Consistent with Stern's (1992)
   definition of nostalgia as the longing for one's past, respondents rate
   the extent to which they miss each of 20 items from when they were
   younger on a 9-point scale (1 = Not at all, 9 = Very much). The
--
   (Batcho et al., 2008), and test-retest reliability of 0.82 over a
   4-week interval (Batcho et al., 2011). Consistent with prior research,
   the Nostalgia Inventory yielded an acceptable level of internal
   consistency of 0.88 as measured by Cronbach's alpha and a split-half
   reliability of 0.81 in this study.

   The Survey of Anticipatory Nostalgia focuses on future loss rather than
   the past (e.g., "society will change"). Given a 9-point scale (1 =
   rarely/not very, 9 = very often/very much), respondents were
--

   As in prior research (Batcho and Shikh, 2016), mean ratings on the
   Nostalgia Inventory correlated moderately with mean ratings on the
   Survey of Anticipatory Nostalgia, r[(][142][)] = 0.52, p <lt; 0.001.

   The Survey of Experience with Stories (Appendix) included eight items
--
Gender

   Men and women did not differ in average personal nostalgia scores, t(1,
   142) = +/-1.768, p = 0.084, [eta][p]^2 = 0.029, but women (M = 6.00, SD
   = 1.18) scored higher in anticipatory nostalgia than did men (M = 5.24,
   SD = 1.20), t(1, 142) = +/-3.29, p = 0.001, [eta][p]^2 = 0.071.

Nostalgia and Positive and Negative Affect

   Ratings of PANAS-X items of generalized affect yielded additional
   evidence for anticipatory nostalgia as a distinct construct. Ratings
   from the three items cheerful, happy, and joyful were averaged to yield
   a composite measure of a tendency toward happiness. Ratings from the
   three items sad, blue, and downhearted were averaged to serve as a
   measure of sadness. Personal nostalgia was not correlated with
   happiness, r[(][142][)] = 0.06, p = 0.476, or sadness, r[(][142][)] =
   0.12, p = 0.136, whereas anticipatory nostalgia correlated
   significantly with sadness, r[(][142][)] = 0.21, p = 0.012, but not
   with happiness, r[(][142][)] = 0.14, p = 0.087.
--
Stories

Nostalgia and Experience With Happy and Sad Stories

   The relationship of personal and anticipatory nostalgia to exposure and
   reactions to happy and sad stories was explored in correlational
   analyses, with gender and dispositional sadness and happiness
--
   number of stories recalled were not correlated for happy stories,
   r[(][142][)] = 0.01, p = 0.922, or sad stories, r[(][142][)] = 0.11, p
   = 0.197, and served as independent measures. Neither type of nostalgia
   correlated significantly with either indicator of frequency of exposure
   to happy and sad stories, suggesting that people prone to personal or
   anticipatory nostalgia have not experienced happy and sad stories more
   or less often. Attraction to or preference for sad or happy stories was
   assessed by asking participants to rate how often they choose happy and
   sad stories. Neither type of nostalgia correlated significantly with
   story choice, suggesting that proneness to personal or anticipatory
   nostalgia does not reflect an underlying bias or preference for happy
   or sad material.

TABLE 1

   Partial correlations of personal and anticipatory nostalgia with
   exposure and reactions to stories with gender and dispositional
   happiness and sadness controlled.
   Personal
   nostalgia
     __________________________________________________________________

   Anticipatory
   nostalgia
     __________________________________________________________________

--
   However, ratings suggested that they react differently to happy and sad
   stories emotionally and cognitively. Emotionally, personal and
   anticipatory nostalgia both correlated with sadness induced by sad
   stories, but only personal nostalgia correlated significantly with
   happiness elicited by happy stories. Results suggested that personal
   and anticipatory nostalgia differed in cognitive engagement with
   stories. Personal nostalgia correlated with learning from happy
   stories, whereas anticipatory nostalgia correlated with learning from
   sad stories. Consistent with prior findings of an association between
   anticipatory nostalgia and a tendency to be made sad by people and
   events, these results suggested that people prone to anticipatory
   nostalgia may be less reactive to happy stories. Present findings
   suggested that people prone to anticipatory nostalgia process sad
   stories in more productive ways, whereas people prone to personal
   nostalgia are more reactive to happy stories and process happy stories
   in beneficial ways.

Contributions of Nostalgia and Stories to Mood

   The contributions of nostalgia and stories to dispositional mood were
   explored further in linear regression analyses (Table 2). The composite
   happiness ratings were examined in a linear regression analysis, with
   gender and mean ratings from the Nostalgia Inventory and the Survey of
   Anticipatory Nostalgia independent variables. The role of stories was
   explored with the inclusion of mean ratings of frequency of exposure to
   happy and sad stories, degree of happiness (sadness) induced by happy
--
   Dispositional happiness
   Gender                              -0.01 0.13 -0.01  -0.03 0.980
   Personal nostalgia                  -0.04 0.05 -0.08  -0.89 0.375
   Anticipatory nostalgia              0.06  0.06  0.10  1.03  0.306
   Exposure to happy stories           0.10  0.04  0.23  2.75  0.007
   Exposure to sad stories             0.04  0.03  0.09  1.13  0.261
--
   Dispositional sadness
   Gender                              0.10  0.18  0.05  0.56  0.580
   Personal nostalgia                  -0.01 0.07 -0.02  -0.20 0.844
   Anticipatory nostalgia              0.11  0.07  0.15  1.47  0.145
   Exposure to happy stories           -0.04 0.05 -0.08  -0.87 0.386
   Exposure to sad stories             0.10  0.04  0.21  2.40  0.018
--

   In a significant model, F(9, 133) = 5.53, p <lt; 0.001, Adjusted R^2 =
   0.223, gender, personal nostalgia, and anticipatory nostalgia were not
   significant. Dispositional happiness was predicted by the frequency of
   exposure to happy, but not sad stories. Similarly, happiness was
--
   A parallel analysis was conducted with the composite sadness ratings as
   the dependent variable. In a significant model, F(9, 133) = 1.92, p =
   0.05, Adjusted R^2 = 0.055, gender, personal nostalgia, and
   anticipatory nostalgia were not significant. Dispositional sadness was
   predicted by the frequency of exposure to sad, but not happy stories.
   However, sadness was not predicted by the sadness elicited by sad
--
   This study introduced a focus on stories as a vehicle for comparing
   emotional and cognitive reactions to cumulative meaningful experiences
   associated with personal and anticipatory nostalgia. Not allowing
   causal relationships to be determined, this exploratory study
   encourages future research based on experimental designs to identify
   variables responsible for the differences between personal and
   anticipatory nostalgia. Further research is needed also to explore
   participant variables in samples characterized by broader demographic
   and diversity constituents.

   A fuller understanding of adaptive functions of nostalgia would be
   advanced with studies that identify the nature and content of the
   stories participants prone to personal or anticipatory nostalgia were
   exposed to and remember. Similarly, future work is needed to determine
   how those prone to nostalgia learn or benefit from happy or sad
   stories. Qualitative analyses of the impactful stories can yield
   insights into the nature of the lessons acquired.
--
Discussion

   The present findings reinforced the importance of when nostalgia is
   felt relative to past and future. Results are consistent with the view
   of anticipatory nostalgia as distinguishable from personal nostalgia
   and worthy of further research as a distinct phenomenon. Stories were
   shown to be effective material for elucidating the roles of emotional
   and cognitive processes in personal and anticipatory nostalgia.
   Exploring reactions to stories can clarify the adaptive and maladaptive
   functions of nostalgia within a meaningful practical context. Access to
   24 h news cycles and online venues have expanded the influence of the
   content and format of stories. The current findings highlight the
--
   the listener or viewer.

   Pertinent to the current study, personal and anticipatory nostalgia
   were distinguished by different ways of interacting with stories. There
   was no evidence that differential exposure to happy and sad stories
   accounted for the distinction. Personal and anticipatory nostalgia both
   correlated with being made sad by sad stories, suggesting that
   participants prone to anticipatory nostalgia are not more sensitive to
   sad stories. However, only personal nostalgia was associated with being
   made happy by happy stories, suggesting that anticipatory nostalgia may
   be associated with less reactivity to happy stories. Furthermore,
   personal nostalgia was related to greater likelihood of learning from
   happy stories, whereas anticipatory nostalgia was associated with
   greater likelihood of learning from sad stories.

   Prior research differentiated personal and anticipatory nostalgia by
   their relationships to happiness and sadness. Personal and anticipatory
   nostalgia both include missing, longing or yearning. In personal
   nostalgia, we enjoy valued aspects of our past again, thereby enjoying
   them twice. In anticipatory nostalgia, we have only the present to
   enjoy them. In fact, we feel the sadness of missing them twice, once in
   the actual present and once in the imagined future. Envisioning what
   the future might bring can be accompanied by sadness missing the
   present and worry about what will come next. In prior research,
   participants prone to anticipatory nostalgia had reported a greater
   tendency for people and experiences to cause them worry and sadness,
   but anticipatory nostalgia did not predict generalized sadness.
   Consistent with prior research, anticipatory nostalgia did not
   contribute to generalized sadness in this study, suggesting that people
   prone to anticipatory nostalgia are not generally unhappy.

   Given that personal and anticipatory nostalgia are both emotional
   constructs, theorists are justified in comparing their emotional
   facets. The present findings highlight the wisdom of considering also
   the cognitive dynamics in the relationship of nostalgia to the impact
   of stories. Rather than generally unhappy, people prone to anticipatory
   nostalgia may be more likely to benefit from sad stories by learning
   ways of coping with current or future problems and anxiety. Their
   inclination to imagine the future as present may reflect conceptual
--
   lives. It remains for future investigations to identify the variables
   or conditions underlying the emotional and cognitive dynamics that
   distinguish personal from anticipatory nostalgia.

   The present findings encourage further research to determine the
   long-term effects of being immersed in happy or sad stories. The
   relationship of learning from sad stories with anticipatory nostalgia
   suggests that benefiting from stories may be facilitated by an ability
   to imagine how the survival or resolution of sadness in a story might
--
   consolation. But looking ahead brings the sad realization that the good
   of the present might be gone too. Future research is needed to
   determine if anticipatory nostalgia can be constructive in certain
   circumstances or applied therapeutically to remind people that time and
   the opportunity to be engaged in the present is fleeting. Sad stories
   may provide opportunities to deal with adversity safely from a
   distance, as anticipatory nostalgia allows loss to be confronted from a
   temporal distance.

--
   cognitive-emotional resources to buffer adverse outcomes. While sadness
   might be considered a maladaptive affective dimension of anticipatory
   nostalgia, the benefits of learning from sad material may suggest there
   are untapped adaptive cognitive functions of anticipatory nostalgia.

Data Availability Statement
--
       10.1177/0265407514533770 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Barrett F. S., Grimm K. J., Robins R. W., Wildschut T., Sedikides
       C., Janata P. (2010). Music-evoked nostalgia: affect, memory, and
       personality. Emotion 10 390-403. 10.1037/a0019006 [PubMed]
       [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Batcho K. I. (1995). Nostalgia: a psychological perspective.
       Percept. Mot. Skills 80 131-143. 10.2466/pms.1995.80.1.131 [PubMed]
       [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Batcho K. I. (1998). Personal nostalgia, world view, memory, and
       emotionality. Percept. Mot. Skills 87 411-432.
       10.2466/pms.1998.87.2.411 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Batcho K. I. (2007). Nostalgia and the emotional tone and content
       of song lyrics. Am. J. Psychol. 120 361-381. [PubMed] [Google
       Scholar]
     * Batcho K. I. (2013). Nostalgia: retreat or support in difficult
       times? Am. J. Psychol. 126 355-367. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Batcho K. I. (2018). The role of nostalgia in resistance: a
       psychological perspective. Qual. Res. Psychol. 2018:1499835
       10.1080/14780887.2018.1499835 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Batcho K. I. (2020). "Nostalgia: the paradoxical bittersweet
       emotion," in Nostalgia Now: Cross-Disciplinary Perspectives on the
       Past in the Present, ed. Jacobsen M. H. (Abingdon: Routledge; ),
       31-46. 10.4324/9780429287602-1 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Batcho K. I., DaRin M. L., Nave A. M., Yaworsky R. R. (2008).
       Nostalgia and identity in song lyrics. Psychol. Aesthet. Creat.
       Arts 2 236-244. 10.1037/1931-3896.2.4.236 [CrossRef] [Google
       Scholar]
--
       survey of childhood experiences. J. Happiness Stud. 12 531-545.
       10.1007/s10902-010-9213-y [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Batcho K. I., Shikh S. (2016). Anticipatory nostalgia: missing the
       present before it's gone. Pers. Individ. Differ. 98 75-84.
       10.1016/j.paid.2016.03.088 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
--
       303-332. 10.1177/0093650216641186 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Bergs Y., Mitas O., Smit B., Nawijn J. (2019). Anticipatory
       nostalgia in experience design. Curr. Issues Tour. 2019:1669539
       10.1080/13683500.2019.1669539 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Cheung W. Y., Hepper E. G., Reid C. A., Green J. D., Wildschut T.,
       Sedikides C. (2019). Anticipated nostalgia: looking forward to
       looking back. Cogn. Emot. 2019:1649247.
       10.1080/02699931.2019.1649247 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Cheung W. Y., Wildschut T., Sedikides C., Hepper E. G., Arndt J.,
       Vingerhoets A. J. (2013). Back to the future: Nostalgia increases
       optimism. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 39 1484-1496.
       10.1177/0146167213499187 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
--
       Scholar]
     * Garrido S. (2018). The influence of personality and coping style on
       the affective outcomes of nostalgia: is nostalgia a healthy coping
       mechanism or rumination? Pers. Individ. Differ. 120 259-264.
       10.1016/j.paid.2016.07.021 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
--
       10.1016/j.jrp.2011.01.002 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Hepper E. G., Ritchie T. D., Sedikides C., Wildschut T. (2012).
       Odyssey's end: lay conceptions of nostalgia reflect its original
       Homeric meaning. Emotion 12 102-119. 10.1037/a0025167 [PubMed]
       [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Iyer A., Jetten J. (2011). What's left behind: identity continuity
       moderates the effect of nostalgia on well-being and life choices.
       J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 101 94-108. 10.1037/a0022496 [PubMed]
       [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Kaplan H. A. (1987). The psychopathology of nostalgia. Psychoanal.
       Rev. 74 465-486. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Kaplan L. J. (1984). Adolescence: The Farewell to Childhood. New
--
       243-249. 10.1037/a0019893 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef]
       [Google Scholar]
     * Koneke V. (2010). Nostalgia: More Bitter than Sweet. Munich: GRIN,
       10.3239/9783640942107 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Landrum R. E., Brakke K., McCarthy M. A. (2019). The pedagogical
--
       10.1176/appi.ajp.2013.13010014 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Newman D. B., Sachs M. E., Stone A. A., Schwarz N. (2019).
       Nostalgia and well-being in daily life: an ecological validity
       perspective. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 118 325-347.
       10.1037/pspp0000236 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google
--
       Associates. [Google Scholar]
     * Routledge C., Arndt J., Sedikides C., Wildschut T. (2008). A blast
       from the past: the terror management function of nostalgia. J. Exp.
       Soc. Psychol. 44 132-140. 10.1016/j.jesp.2006.11.001 [CrossRef]
       [Google Scholar]
     * Sedikides C., Wildschut T., Routledge C., Arndt J. (2015).
       Nostalgia counteracts self-discontinuity and restores
       self-continuity. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 45 52-61. 10.1002/ejsp.2073
       [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Seehusen J., Cordaro F., Wildschut T., Sedikides C., Routledge C.,
       Blackhart G. C., et al. (2013). Individual differences in nostalgia
       proneness: the integrating role of the need to belong. Pers.
       Individ. Differ. 55 904-908. 10.1016/j.paid.2013.07.020 [CrossRef]
--
       10.1002/ejsp.1865 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Stephan E., Wildschut T., Sedikides C., Zhou X., He W., Routledge
       C., et al. (2014). The mnemonic mover: Nostalgia regulates
       avoidance and approach motivation. Emotion 14 545-561.
       10.1037/a0035673 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Stern B. B. (1992). Historical and personal nostalgia in
       advertising text: the Fin de siecle effect. J. Advertising 21
       11-22. 10.1080/00913367.1992.10673382 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
--
       and Negative Affect Schedule - Expanded Form. Iowa: The University
       of Iowa Press. [Google Scholar]
     * Werman D. S. (1977). Normal and pathological nostalgia. J. Am.
       Psychoanal. Assoc. 25 387-398. 10.1177/000306517702500205 [PubMed]
       [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Wildschut T., Sedikides C., Alowidy D. (2019). Hanin: Nostalgia
       among Syrian refugees. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 49 1368-1384.
       10.1002/ejsp.2590 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Wildschut T., Sedikides C., Arndt J., Routledge C. (2006).
       Nostalgia: content, triggers, functions. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 91
       975-993. 10.1037/0022-3514.91.5.975 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google
       Scholar]
     * Wildschut T., Sedikides C., Routledge C., Arndt J., Cordaro F.
       (2010). Nostalgia as a repository of social connectedness: the role
       of attachment-related avoidance. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 98 573-586.
       10.1037/a0017597 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Zhou X., Sedikides C., Wildschut T., Gao D. (2008). Counteracting
       loneliness: on the restorative function of nostalgia. Psychol. Sci.
       19 1023-1029. 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02194.x [PubMed] [CrossRef]
       [Google Scholar]
     * Zinchenko A. V. (2011). Nostalgia: dialogue between memory and
       knowing. J. Russ. East Eur. Psychol. 49 84-97.
       10.2753/rpo1061-0405490306 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-1">
<text>
   #alternate What Is Nostalgia Good For? Quite a Bit, Research Shows

   (BUTTON)
--
   Today’s Paper

   Science|What Is Nostalgia Good For? Quite a Bit, Research Shows
   https://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/09/science/what-is-nostalgia-good-for-q
   uite-a-bit-research-shows.html
     * (BUTTON) Give this articleGive this articleGive this article
--
   Continue reading the main story

What Is Nostalgia Good For? Quite a Bit, Research Shows

     * Send any friend a story
--
   transcript

Science of Nostalgia

It was first thought to be a “neurological disease of essentially demonic
cause,” but it turns out that nostalgia is good for your brain. And there’s
science to prove it.

--

   It was first thought to be a “neurological disease of essentially
   demonic cause,” but it turns out that nostalgia is good for your brain.
   And there’s science to prove it.

--
   Southampton, Constantine Sedikides had lunch with a colleague in the
   psychology department and described some unusual symptoms he’d been
   feeling. A few times a week, he was suddenly hit with nostalgia for his
   previous home at the University of North Carolina: memories of old
   friends, Tar Heel basketball games, fried okra, the sweet smells of
--

   His colleague, a clinical psychologist, made an immediate diagnosis. He
   must be depressed. Why else live in the past? Nostalgia had been
   considered a disorder ever since the term was coined by a 17th-century
   Swiss physician who attributed soldiers’ mental and physical maladies
--

   “I told him I did live my life forward, but sometimes I couldn’t help
   thinking about the past, and it was rewarding,” he says. “Nostalgia
   made me feel that my life had roots and continuity. It made me feel
   good about myself and my relationships. It provided a texture to my
--
   today includes dozens of researchers around the world using tools
   developed at his social-psychology laboratory, including a
   questionnaire called the Southampton Nostalgia Scale. After a decade of
   study, nostalgia isn’t what it used to be — it’s looking a lot better.

   Nostalgia has been shown to counteract loneliness, boredom and anxiety.
   It makes people more generous to strangers and more tolerant of
   outsiders. Couples feel closer and look happier when they’re sharing
   nostalgic memories. On cold days, or in cold rooms, people use
   nostalgia to literally feel warmer.

   Nostalgia does have its painful side — it’s a bittersweet emotion — but
   the net effect is to make life seem more meaningful and death less
   frightening. When people speak wistfully of the past, they typically
   become more optimistic and inspired about the future.

   “Nostalgia makes us a bit more human,” Dr. Sedikides says. He considers
   the first great nostalgist to be Odysseus, an itinerant who used
   memories of his family and home to get through hard times, but Dr.
   Sedikides emphasizes that nostalgia is not the same as homesickness.
   It’s not just for those away from home, and it’s not a sickness,
   despite its historical reputation.

   Nostalgia was originally described as a “neurological disease of
   essentially demonic cause” by Johannes Hoffer, the Swiss doctor who
   coined the term in 1688. Military physicians speculated that its
--
   A Universal Feeling

   In the 19th and 20th centuries nostalgia was variously classified as an
   “immigrant psychosis,” a form of “melancholia” and a “mentally
   repressive compulsive disorder” among other pathologies. But when Dr.
   Sedikides, Tim Wildschut and other psychologists at Southampton began
   studying nostalgia, they found it to be common around the world,
   including in children as young as 7 (who look back fondly on birthdays
   and vacations).

   “The defining features of nostalgia in England are also the defining
   features in Africa and South America,” Dr. Wildschut says. The topics
   are universal — reminiscences about friends and family members,
--
   the self as the protagonist surrounded by close friends.

   Most people report experiencing nostalgia at least once a week, and
   nearly half experience it three or four times a week. These reported
   bouts are often touched off by negative events and feelings of
--
   outnumber the negative elements, as the Southampton researchers found
   by methodically analyzing stories collected in the laboratory as well
   as in a magazine named Nostalgia.

   “Nostalgic stories often start badly, with some kind of problem, but
--
   and affiliation, and you become more generous toward others.”

   A quick way to induce nostalgia is through music, which has become a
   favorite tool of researchers. In an experiment in the Netherlands, Ad
   J. J. M. Vingerhoets of Tilburg University and colleagues found that
--
   That warm glow was investigated in southern China by Xinyue Zhou of Sun
   Yat-Sen University. By tracking students over the course of a month,
   she and colleagues found that feelings of nostalgia were more common on
   cold days. The researchers also found that people in a cool room (68
   degrees Fahrenheit) were more likely to nostalgize than people in
--
   Not everyone in the cool room turned nostalgic during the experiment,
   but the ones who did reported feeling warmer. That mind-body link, Dr.
   Wildschut says, means that nostalgia might have had evolutionary value
   to our ancestors long before Odysseus.

--

   Of course, memories can also be depressing. Some researchers in the
   1970s and ’80s suggested that nostalgia could worsen a problem that
   psychologists call self-discontinuity, which is nicely defined in
   “Suite: Judy Blue Eyes,” by Stephen Stills: “Don’t let the past remind
--

   But the feeling of discontinuity doesn’t seem to be a typical result of
   nostalgia, according to recent studies. In fact, people tend to have a
   healthier sense of self-continuity if they nostalgize more frequently,
   as measured on the scale developed at Southampton. To understand why
--
   with English, Dutch and American adults.

   First, the experimenters induced nostalgia by playing hit songs from
   the past for some people and letting them read lyrics to their favorite
   songs. Afterward, these people were more likely than a control group to
--
   nostalgize, presumably to ward off Sartrean despair.

   Moreover, when some people were induced to nostalgia before reading the
   bleak essay, they were less likely to be convinced by it. The brief
   stroll down memory lane apparently made life seem worthwhile, at least
--
   gloomy French intellectuals remains to be determined.)

   “Nostalgia serves a crucial existential function,” Dr. Routledge says.
   “It brings to mind cherished experiences that assure us we are valued
   people who have meaningful lives. Some of our research shows that
   people who regularly engage in nostalgia are better at coping with
   concerns about death.”

   Feeding the Memory Bank

   The usefulness of nostalgia seems to vary with age, according to Erica
   Hepper, a psychologist at the University of Surrey in England. She and
   her colleagues have found that nostalgia levels tend to be high among
   young adults, then dip in middle age and rise again during old age.

   “Nostalgia helps us deal with transitions,” Dr. Hepper says. “The young
   adults are just moving away from home and or starting their first jobs,
   so they fall back on memories of family Christmases, pets and friends
--
   although his range has expanded greatly over the past decade. He says
   that the years of research have inspired strategies for increasing
   nostalgia in his own life. One is to create more moments that will be
   memorable.

   “I don’t miss an opportunity to build nostalgic-to-be memories,” he
   says. “We call this anticipatory nostalgia and have even started a line
   of relevant research.”

--
   with anything else.

   “Many other people,” he explains, “have defined nostalgia as comparing
   the past with the present and saying, implicitly, that the past was
   better — ‘Those were the days.’ But that may not be the best way for
--
   inmates.

   Is there anyone who shouldn’t be indulging in nostalgia? People who are
   leery of intimate relationships — “avoidant,” in psychological jargon —
   seem to reap relatively small benefits from nostalgia compared with
   people who crave closeness. And there are undoubtedly neurotics who
   overdo it. But for most others, Dr. Sedikides recommends regular
--
   nostalgizing two or maybe three times a week,” he says. “Experience it
   as a prized possession. When Humphrey Bogart says, ‘We’ll always have
   Paris,’ that’s nostalgia for you. We have it, and nobody can take it
   away from us. It’s our diamond.”
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-20">
<text>
    2. Psychology

Collective Nostalgia for the Past

   4 minutes
   Collective Nostalgia for the Past Collective Nostalgia for the Past

   Last update: 08 March, 2018
   Nostalgia as pictured by a pocket watch in the sun.
   Nostalgia as pictured by a pocket watch in the sun. Nostalgia as
   pictured by a pocket watch in the sun.
   We all feel nostalgic sometimes. We wish we were back in a certain
   time, a certain situation, something that’s already happened. We suffer
   over something that’s gone now, something we had and then lost. Maybe
   it’s about a person, a group (collective nostalgia), an object, or an
   event.

   There are also two different kinds of nostalgia, and the difference is
   very important. The first kind is a positive feeling, a nice memory of
   an object that’s gone or lost to time. The second kind is a negative
--
   Black and white photos. Black and white photos.

Nostalgia for people

   Probably the first thing you think of when it comes to nostalgia is
   desire for a loved one. Breakups, distance, or death are some things
   that give us that longing feeling. But nostalgia isn’t any less
   important when its object is a place instead of a person.

   There’s a word in Spanish to talk about that kind of nostalgia, the
   kind that mixes melancholy and wishing for your homeland: “morriña.”
   The word comes from the Galician language. They say that “morriña” is a
--
   calls to mind.

   “Look into my nostalgia and tell me what you see.”
   -Xavier Velasco-

Collective nostalgia

   There’s another kind of nostalgia for situations or things of the past.
   It’s called collective nostalgia. What it means is a shared longing for
   what society used to be like.

--
   should bury any nostalgic feelings at all.

Nostalgia as motivation

   Collective nostalgia, being the group emotion that it is, can
   powerfully shape a group’s behavior. When you share a longing for a
   specific kind of world with the majority of people in your group, it’s
--
   work.

   Collective nostalgia can sometimes be a good prediction for collective
   action. The more intense the group emotion is, the more likely it is
   people will take to the streets. They will be more likely to cry out
--
   into norms or laws to things that cross into illegal territory, like
   vandalism or violence.
   Three friends looking with collective nostalgia at the foggy valley.
   Three friends looking with collective nostalgia at the foggy valley.
   Three friends looking with collective nostalgia at the foggy valley.

Collective nostalgia for good

   But collective nostalgia doesn’t have to be negative. If the longing is
   about people’s old ideas of their country, they’ll have to think about
   how that country really was. Or even better, they’ll think about what
   exactly they long for about that country.

   If their nostalgia is about values like openness and tolerance, any
   actions they take will have more liberal goals. Granted, that doesn’t
   mean the methods they use to achieve those goals will be open and
   tolerant.

   If you have the ability to shape your nostalgia, make it your
   motivation to create a better world. Miss freedom and not restriction,
   miss diversity and not exclusion.
   It might interest you...
   When Nostalgia Forgets the Present
   When Nostalgia Forgets the Present When Nostalgia Forgets the Present
   Exploring your mind Exploring your mind
   Read it in Exploring your mind
   When Nostalgia Forgets the Present

   The movie “Midnight in Paris” by Woody Allen explains nostalgia as the
   negation of the present through the life of its main character.
     __________________________________________________________________
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-21">
<text>
   https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.570621

Nostalgia Proneness and the Collective Self

   [24] Georgios Abakoumkin^1 ^*, [24] Tim Wildschut^2 and
--
       University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom

   In two studies, we examined the association between nostalgia proneness
   (i.e., trait-level nostalgia) and importance of the collective self. In
   Study 1, we tested and supported the hypothesis that nostalgia
   proneness is positively correlated with relational collectivism, which
   entails an emphasis on one’s connections with close others and small
   social networks. In Study 2, we demonstrated that nostalgia proneness
   is also positively correlated with group collectivism, which emphasizes
   one’s membership in more abstract, larger social groups or categories,
   and was reflected in increased identification with a national ingroup.
   These findings offer insight into the nature of nostalgia proneness—a
   consequential and stable personality trait.

Introduction

   Nostalgia, “a sentimental longing … for the past” (Pearsall, 1998, p.
   1266), is an ambivalent, albeit predominantly positive, and social
   emotion (Hepper et al., 2012a; Sedikides and Wildschut, 2016; for
--
   brought to life and become part of one’s present (Davis, 1979; Batcho,
   1998; Abeyta et al., 2015; Wildschut et al., 2018). As a result,
   nostalgia makes one feel loved, supported, and efficacious in social
   relations (Zhou et al., 2008; Wildschut et al., 2010). However, most of
   the research on the sociality function of nostalgia has been concerned
   with momentary or transient (i.e., state-level) nostalgia. In the
   present investigation, we focus on the role of trait-level nostalgia
   (i.e., nostalgia proneness; Sedikides et al., 2004; Wildschut and
   Sedikides, in press).

   The extant literature indicates that nostalgia proneness is positively
   related with various indices of sociality. High-nostalgia (compared to
   low-nostalgia) individuals value social inclusion. In an early study
   (Batcho, 1998), participants first completed the Nostalgia Inventory
   (NI; Batcho, 1995), which assesses nostalgia proneness across different
   aspects of everyday life. Specifically, participants rated how much
   they generally missed each of 20 items from when they were younger
   (e.g., “someone I loved,” “the way people were,” “my pets”). The
   average rating was used to classify participants as high nostalgia and
   low nostalgia by selecting the top and bottom 25% of the sample,
   respectively. Next, participants rated themselves on 10 aspects of
   personality, including the extent to which they preferred activities
   with people rather than alone. High-nostalgia (compared to
   low-nostalgia) participants reported a stronger preference to be with
   other people rather than alone.

   More recently, Juhl et al. (2020) showed the positive associations of
   nostalgia proneness with three core features of human sociality:
   empathy (Eisenberg and Strayer, 1987), attachment security (Mikulincer
   and Shaver, 2011), and prosocial or charitable behavior (Batson, 2011).
   Across five studies, nostalgia proneness was consistently associated
   with greater affective empathy (assessed with various measures; e.g.,
   “Seeing people cry upsets me”; Mehrabian and Epstein, 1972), including
   among young children. Moreover, the link between nostalgia proneness
   and affective empathy held when controlling for domain-level (Big Five)
   personality traits and did not vary significantly as a function of age
   or gender. Juhl et al. further showed that high-nostalgia (compared to
   low-nostalgia) individuals evinced greater attachment security
   (assessed with the Security subscale of the Attachment Style
   Questionnaire; e.g., “I trust other people and I like it when other
   people can rely on me”; Hofstra et al., 2005). Attachment security, in
   turn, mediated the relation between nostalgia proneness and empathy.
   High-nostalgia (compared to low-nostalgia) individuals were more likely
   even to donate money to charity when given the opportunity to do so,
   and this relation was mediated serially by attachment security and
   affective empathy.

   The distinctive sociality of nostalgia proneness is brought into sharp
   relief when nostalgia is contrasted with two other modes of thinking
   about one’s past: rumination (Rusting and Nolen-Hoeksema, 1998) and
   counterfactual thinking (Epstude and Roese, 2008). Cheung et al. (2018)
   examined how nostalgia, rumination, and counterfactual thinking are
   similar or different in terms of their relation with seven functions of
   autobiographical memory (i.e., usages of memory or motives to remember;
--
   wronged by others), conversation (enlivening current social exchange),
   boredom reduction (counteracting tedium), and death preparation (coping
   with mortality awareness). The uniqueness of nostalgia proneness
   (compared to rumination and counterfactual thinking) resided in its
   comparatively strong positive association with intimacy maintenance and
   weak association with bitterness revival. Nostalgia-prone individuals,
   then, indicate that they use autobiographical memories to stay
   connected to loved ones and not to stir up bitterness toward others.

   In light of this cumulative evidence, we propose that nostalgia-prone
   individuals assign greater importance to the collective self. Whereas
   the individual self refers to those unique aspects of the self-concept
--
   small social networks. Group collectivism denotes an emphasis on one’s
   membership in more abstract, larger social groups or categories. In
   Study 1, we tested the association of nostalgia proneness with
   relational collectivism (and individualism). In Study 2, we extended
   this line of inquiry by examining the link between nostalgia proneness
   and group collectivism, as reflected in (national) ingroup
   identification. Our overarching objective was to tighten the
   nomological net around nostalgia proneness and thereby better
   understand this consequential and stable personality trait (Wildschut
   and Sedikides, in press).
--
   In Study 1, we used survey data available from the Longitudinal
   Internet Studies for the Social Sciences (LISS) panel. Participants
   completed measures of nostalgia proneness, individualism, and
   relational collectivism. The measures of individualism and collectivism
   incorporated a further, cross-cutting distinction between a horizontal
--
   competition and status acquisition, and vertical collectivism involves
   subordinating and sacrificing oneself for the sake of one’s social
   relations. We hypothesized that nostalgia proneness would be positively
   related to both horizontal and vertical collectivism dimensions (but
   not to individualism dimensions).
--
   Netherlands. We assembled the dataset from three LISS studies.
   “Background Variables” (completed April 2011) contained demographic
   measures, “Nostalgia—part 1, wave 1” (completed November 2012)
   contained measures of nostalgia proneness, and “Self-Regulatory
   Orientation” (completed April 2011) contained measures of collectivism
   and individualism. Data for the “Background Variables” study are
   updated monthly, and we used the data collected in the same month as
   the “Self-Regulatory Orientation” study. The “Nostalgia” study assessed
   nostalgia proneness at six timepoints. We selected the timepoint (part
   1, wave 1) that was closest to the “Self-Regulatory Orientation” study.

Participants

   Eight hundred sixty-eight participants completed measures of nostalgia
   proneness, collectivism, and individualism, as well as demographic
   information (457 women, 411 men; M [age] = 52.13 years, SD [age] =
   16.40 years, Range[age] = 16–91 years).

Nostalgia Proneness

   Participants in the “Nostalgia—part 1, wave 1” LISS study completed the
   Southampton Nostalgia Scale (SNS; Barrett et al., 2010) and the NI
   (Batcho, 1995). For the SNS, they responded to seven items. Three of
   them measured the extent to which participants found nostalgia
   valuable, important, or significant (1 = not at all, 7 = very much),
   and four measured how frequently participants became nostalgic (1 =
--
   20 objects (e.g., “someone I loved” and “my childhood toys”). We
   averaged responses to create NI scores (α = 0.93; M = 3.83, SD = 1.11).
   We used two measures of nostalgia proneness for the purpose of
   convergent validation (Campbell and Fiske, 1959; Wildschut and
   Sedikides, in press).
--

   We present zero-order correlations among study variables in Table 1. As
   hypothesized, both measures of nostalgia proneness (SNS and NI) were
   significantly and positively correlated with both (relational)
   collectivism dimensions (horizontal collectivism and vertical
   collectivism). The nostalgia proneness measures were also positively
   correlated with both individualism dimensions, albeit less strongly
   than with the collectivism dimensions.
--
   www.frontiersin.org

   Table 1. Correlations among nostalgia proneness, collectivism,
   individualism, and demographics in Study 1.

--
   individualism and vertical collectivism. This overlap between the
   collectivism and individualism dimensions raises a legitimate question
   concerning their unique relations with nostalgia proneness. To address
   this, we first tested the partial correlation of each
   nostalgia-proneness measure with each collectivism dimension,
   controlling for the individualism dimensions. The positive associations
   between nostalgia-proneness measures and collectivism dimensions
   remained significant, when controlling for individualism dimensions. To
   be precise, the SNS was significantly correlated with horizontal
--
   horizontal collectivism (pr = 0.21, p <lt; 0.001) and vertical
   collectivism (pr = 0.24, p <lt; 0.001). Next, we tested the partial
   correlation of each nostalgia-proneness measure with each individualism
   dimension, controlling for the collectivism dimensions. The SNS was not
   significantly associated with horizontal individualism (pr = 0.01, p =
--
   Finally, we examined correlations with demographic variables. Neither
   gender nor age was significantly correlated with either measure of
   nostalgia proneness. Women evinced significantly higher vertical
   collectivism scores and lower vertical individualism scores than men.
   Older (compared to younger) individuals scored significantly higher on
   vertical collectivism and horizontal individualism and lower on
   vertical individualism. When we controlled for age and gender (in
   partial-correlation analyses), the correlations of both nostalgia
   measures with both collectivism dimensions were practically identical.

--
Study 2

   In Study 2, we examined the relation between nostalgia proneness and
   group collectivism. We assessed group collectivism in terms of
   participants’ identification with their national ingroup.
--

   Participants responded to the materials individually, on a computer. As
   in Study 1, we assessed nostalgia proneness with the SNS (Barrett et
   al., 2010; α = 0.91, M = 5.04, SD = 1.13) and NI (Batcho, 1995; α =
   0.87, M = 4.38, SD = 1.04). We assessed national identification with
--
   We present correlations between measured variables in Table 2. We did
   not include gender in the correlation matrix, because the sample
   included few men (n = 4). As hypothesized, both measures of nostalgia
   proneness were significantly and positively related to both group-level
   self-definition and group-level self-investment. Older participants
   scored lower on nostalgia (but age range was limited in this student
   sample). When we controlled for age (in partial correlation analyses),
   the correlations of SNS scores with self-definition (pr = 0.22, p =
--
   www.frontiersin.org

   Table 2. Correlations among nostalgia proneness, group-level
   self-definition, group-level investment, and age in Study 2.

   Study 1 revealed that nostalgia proneness is associated with higher
   relational collectivism. Study 2 conceptually replicated and extended
   this finding by demonstrating that nostalgia proneness is also linked
   with higher group collectivism, as reflected in the strength of ingroup
   identification.
--
Summary of Findings

   Extant evidence has tied nostalgia proneness to a stronger preference
   for engaging in activities with others (Batcho, 1998), increased
   empathy (Cheung et al., 2017a; Juhl et al., 2020; Newman et al., 2020),
   and greater emphasis on intimacy maintenance versus bitterness revival
   (Cheung et al., 2018). The present findings tighten further this
   nomological net around nostalgia proneness. Our point of departure was
   Brewer and Chen’s (2007) influential distinction between relational and
   group collectivism. Whereas relational collectivism involves
--
   one’s membership in larger social groups or categories.

   In Study 1, we examined the association of nostalgia proneness with
   relational collectivism (and individualism). This study further
   included a cross-cutting distinction between horizontal (i.e.,
--
   others) orientations (Singelis et al., 1995; Triandis and Gelfand,
   1998). Zero-order and partial correlations (controlling for
   individualism) revealed that high-nostalgia (compared to low-nostalgia)
   individuals scored higher on measures of horizontal and vertical
   collectivism. Zero-order correlations between nostalgia proneness and
   the individualism measures were small and rendered non-significant when
   we controlled for collectivism (in partial-correlation analyses). Study
   2, in turn, demonstrated a link between nostalgia proneness and group
   collectivism, as reflected in two aspects of (national) ingroup
   identification: group level self-definition (i.e., the degree to which
--
   self-investment (i.e., the extent to which individuals value the
   ingroup and their membership in it). Across both studies, independent
   assessments of nostalgia proneness (SNS and NI) produced convergent
   support for the conclusion that high-nostalgia (compared to
   low-nostalgia) individuals are more likely both to emphasize the
   importance of maintaining tightly knit networks of interpersonal
   relationships, including the attendant rights and responsibilities
--
   direction of causality. However, prior research is consistent with the
   possibility of a bi-directional relation between collectivism and
   nostalgia proneness. Collectivism entails a strong need to belong (Bond
   and Smith, 1996; Suh, 2007) and there is now strong evidence that
   experimentally induced belongingness deficits, which heighten the need
   to belong (Hackenbracht and Gasper, 2013), lead to increased nostalgia
   (Zhou et al., 2008; Wildschut et al., 2010; Seehusen et al., 2013;
   Abakoumkin et al., 2017). Thus, collectivism may cause nostalgic
   reverie. Nostalgia, in turn, serves a compensatory role, assuaging the
   need to belong by strengthening social connectedness (for a review, see
   Sedikides and Wildschut, 2019). By so doing, nostalgia can increase the
   importance and strength of relational and group bonds. For example,
   discussing a shared nostalgic (vs. ordinary) memory with a close other
--
   well as ingroup bias in the evaluation of domestic and foreign consumer
   products (Dimitriadou et al., 2019). These findings point to a causal
   path from nostalgia to relational and group collectivism, particularly
   when one’s nostalgia pertains to, or is shared within, the collective
   in question. Explicating the bi-directional causal paths between
   nostalgia and (relational as well as group) collectivism presents a
   fruitful direction for research.

   Another unresolved question is whether nostalgia proneness, through its
   positive association with group collectivism, is linked to increased
   prejudice and ethnocentrism. To understand the nuanced picture emerging
   from extant findings, two issues deserve careful consideration. First,
   it is important to distinguish between nostalgia for experiences from
   one’s personal past (i.e., the focus of our present studies) and
   nostalgia for the ostensibly glorious past of one’s group (e.g.,
   national nostalgia). Proneness to nostalgia for one’s personal past is
   negatively correlated with prejudice against outgroups (Smeekes, 2015;
   Cheung et al., 2017a), and recalling a personally nostalgic (compared
   to ordinary) experience with a specific outgroup member reduces
   prejudice toward the entire outgroup (Turner et al., 2012, 2013, 2018).
   By contrast, nostalgia for the past of one’s group (e.g., “How often do
   you long for the good old days of the country?”) has been linked with
   higher prejudice, national glorification, and anger toward outgroups
--
   Baldwin et al., 2018). Yet, findings by Martinovic et al. (2017) raise
   a second issue that requires attention, pertaining to the referent of
   nostalgia. Their findings indicate that, under certain circumstances,
   nostalgia for the collective past is associated with improved outgroup
   attitudes. Participants from former Yugoslavia rated their nostalgia
   for the Yugoslavia of the past (e.g., “I get nostalgic when I think
   back to Yugoslavia in the past times”) and then indicated their level
   of contact with members from different ethnic subgroups from former
   Yugoslavia (Bosniaks, Serbs, and Croats). Nostalgia for the
   superordinate group, Yugoslavia, predicted increased contact between
   ethnic subgroups. Furthermore, political orientation might affect the
   referent of nostalgia. For example, political conservatives might be
   more prone than political liberals to nostalgize about the “good old
   days of a country” and thereby identify with this country. Clarifying
   the precise circumstances under which nostalgia proneness, in its
   different guises, is either positively or negatively associated with
   outgroup prejudice presents a challenge for future research.
--
Coda

   High-nostalgia (compared to low-nostalgia) individuals attach great
   value and significance to establishing, protecting, and enhancing
   close-knit interpersonal relationships, as well as to maintaining the
--
   source of both great happiness and intense suffering. The present
   findings mark a step along the path to understanding these profound and
   sometimes contradictory implications of nostalgia proneness and human
   sociality.

--

   Abakoumkin, G., Hepper, E. G., Wildschut, T., and Sedikides, C. (2019).
   From nostalgia through social connectedness to self-continuity:
   replication and extension. Hell. J. Psychol. 16, 127–144.

--

   Abakoumkin, G., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., and Bakarou, M. (2017).
   Nostalgia in response to group-based exclusion: the role of
   attachment-related avoidance. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 47, 373–381. doi:
   10.1002/ejsp.2235
--
   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Baldwin, M., White, M. II, and Sullivan, D. (2018). Nostalgia for
   America’s past can buffer collective guilt. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 48,
   433–446. doi: 10.1002/ejsp.2348
--

   Barrett, F. S., Grimm, K. J., Robins, R. W., Wildschut, T., Sedikides,
   C., and Janata, P. (2010). Music-evoked nostalgia: affect, memory, and
   personality. Emotion 10, 390–403. doi: 10.1037/a0019006

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Batcho, K. I. (1995). Nostalgia: a psychological perspective. Percept.
   Mot. Skills 80, 131–143. doi: 10.2466/pms.1995.80.1.131

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Batcho, K. I. (1998). Personal nostalgia, world view, memory, and
   emotionality. Percept. Mot. Skills 87, 411–432. doi:
   10.2466/pms.1998.87.2.411
--
   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Batcho, K. I. (2013). Nostalgia: the bittersweet history of a
   psychological concept. Hist. Psychol. 16, 165–176. doi:
   10.1037/a0032427
--
   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Cheung, W. -Y., Sedikides, C., and Wildschut, T. (2017a). Nostalgia
   proneness and reduced prejudice. Personal. Individ. Differ. 109, 89–97.
   doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2016.12.045
--

   Cheung, W. -Y., Sedikides, C., Wildschut, T., Tausch, N., and Ayanian,
   A. H. (2017b). Collective nostalgia is associated with stronger
   outgroup-directed anger and participation in ingroup-favoring
   collective action. J. Soc. Polit. Psychol. 5, 301–319. doi:
--

   Cheung, W. -Y., Wildschut, T., and Sedikides, C. (2018).
   Autobiographical memory functions of nostalgia in comparison to
   rumination: similarity and uniqueness. Memory 26, 229–237. doi:
   10.1080/09658211.2017.1346129
--
   Google Scholar

   Davis, F. (1979). Yearning for yesterday: A sociology of nostalgia. New
   York, NY: The Free Press.

   Google Scholar

   De Diego, F. F., and Ots, C. V. (2014). Nostalgia: a conceptual
   history. Hist. Psychiatry 25, 404–411. doi: 10.1177/0957154X14545290

--

   Dimitriadou, M., Maciejovsky, B., Wildschut, T., and Sedikides, C.
   (2019). Collective nostalgia and domestic country bias. J. Exp.
   Psychol. Appl. 25, 445–457. doi: 10.1037/xap0000209

--

   Hepper, E. G., Ritchie, T. D., Sedikides, C., and Wildschut, T.
   (2012a). Odyssey’s end: lay conceptions of nostalgia reflect its
   original Homeric meaning. Emotion 12, 102–119. doi: 10.1037/a0025167

--
   Google Scholar

   Hertz, D. G. (1990). Trauma and nostalgia: new aspects of the coping of
   aging holocaust survivors. Isr. J. Psychiatry Relat. Sci. 27, 189–198.

--

   Juhl, J., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Diebel, T., Cheung, W. Y., and
   Vingerhoets, A. J. J. M. (2020). Nostalgia proneness and empathy:
   generality, underlying mechanism, and implications for prosocial
   behavior. J. Pers. 88, 485–500. doi: 10.1111/jopy.12505
--

   Martinovic, B., Jetten, J., Smeekes, A., and Verkuyten, M. (2017).
   Collective memory of a dissolved country: collective nostalgia and
   guilt assignment as predictors of interethnic relations between
   diaspora groups from former Yugoslavia. J. Soc. Polit. Psychol. 5,
--

   Newman, D. B., Sachs, M. E., Stone, A. A., and Schwarz, N. (2020).
   Nostalgia and well-being in daily life: an ecological validity
   perspective. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 118, 325–347. doi:
   10.1037/pspp0000236
--
   Google Scholar

   Sedikides, C., and Wildschut, T. (2016). “Nostalgia: a bittersweet
   emotion that confers psychological health benefits” in Wiley handbook
   of positive clinical psychology. eds. A. M. Wood and J. Johnson
--

   Sedikides, C., and and Wildschut, T. (2019). The sociality of personal
   and collective nostalgia. Eur. Rev. Soc. Psychol. 30, 123–173. doi:
   10.1080/10463283.2019.1630098

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Sedikides, C., Wildschut, T., and Baden, D. (2004). “Nostalgia:
   conceptual issues and existential functions” in Handbook of
   experimental existential psychology. eds. J. Greenberg, S. Koole, and
--

   Sedikides, C., Wildschut, T., Cheung, W. -Y., Routledge, C., Hepper, E.
   G., Arndt, J., et al. (2016). Nostalgia fosters self-continuity:
   uncovering the mechanism (social connectedness) and the consequence
   (eudaimonic well-being). Emotion 16, 524–539. doi: 10.1037/emo0000136
--

   Seehusen, J., Cordaro, F., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Routledge, C.,
   Blackhart, G. C., et al. (2013). Individual differences in nostalgia
   proneness: the integrating role of the need to belong. Personal.
   Individ. Differ. 55, 904–908. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2013.07.020
--
   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Smeekes, A. (2015). National nostalgia: a group-based emotion that
   benefits the in-group but hampers intergroup relations. Int. J.
   Intercult. Relat. 49, 54–67. doi: 10.1016/j.ijintrel.2015.07.001
--
   Jasinskaja-Lahti, I., Ariyanto, A., et al. (2018). Regaining in-group
   continuity in times of anxiety about the group’s future: a study on the
   role of collective nostalgia across 27 countries. Soc. Psychol. 49,
   311–329. doi: 10.1027/1864-9335/a000350

--

   Smeekes, A., Verkuyten, M., and Martinovic, B. (2015). Longing for the
   country’s good old days: national nostalgia, autochthony beliefs, and
   opposition to Muslim expressive rights. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 54,
   561–580. doi: 10.1111/bjso.12097
--

   Turner, R. N., Wildschut, T., and Sedikides, C. (2012). Dropping the
   weight stigma: nostalgia improves attitudes toward persons who are
   overweight. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 48, 130–137. doi:
   10.1016/j.jesp.2011.09.007
--

   Turner, R. N., Wildschut, T., and Sedikides, C. (2018). Fighting ageism
   through nostalgia. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 48, 196–208. doi:
   10.1002/ejsp.2317

--

   Turner, R. N., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., and Gheorghiou, M. (2013).
   Combating the mental health stigma with nostalgia. Eur. J. Soc.
   Psychol. 43, 413–422. doi: 10.1002/ejsp.1952

--

   Wildschut, T., Bruder, M., Robertson, S., van Tilburg, W. A. P., and
   Sedikides, C. (2014). Collective nostalgia: a group-level emotion that
   confers unique benefits on the group. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 107,
   844–863. doi: 10.1037/a0037760
--

   Wildschut, T., and Sedikides, C. (in press). “The measurement of
   nostalgia” in Handbook of positive psychology assessment. eds. W. Ruch,
   A. B. Bakker, L. Tay, and F. Gander (Göttingen: Hogrefe).

--

   Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., and Robertson, S. (2018). Sociality and
   intergenerational transfer of older adults’ nostalgia. Memory 26,
   1030–1041. doi: 10.1080/09658211.2018.1470645

--

   Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Routledge, C., Arndt, J., and Cordaro, F.
   (2010). Nostalgia as a repository of social connectedness: the role of
   attachment-related avoidance. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 98, 573–586. doi:
   10.1037/a0017597
--

   Zhou, X., Sedikides, C., Wildschut, T., and Gao, D. -G. (2008).
   Counteracting loneliness: on the restorative function of nostalgia.
   Psychol. Sci. 19, 1023–1029. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02194

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Keywords: nostalgia proneness, relational collectivism, group
   collectivism, ingroup identification, collective self

   Citation: Abakoumkin G, Wildschut T and Sedikides C (2020) Nostalgia
   Proneness and the Collective Self. Front. Psychol. 11:570621. doi:
   10.3389/fpsyg.2020.570621
--
This article is part of the Research Topic

   Current Issues in Nostalgia Research
   View all 13 Articles
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-22">
<text>
   The Human Brain

How Nostalgia Works

   Prev NEXT
--
     *

Nostalgia and Your Brain

   Nostalgia runs high in transitional age ranges: the teens through 20s
   and over 50 (from &amp;quot;middle-aged&amp;quot; to &amp;quot;senior&amp;quot;). "
   Nostalgia runs high in transitional age ranges: the teens through 20s
   and over 50 (from &amp;quot;middle-aged&amp;quot; to &amp;quot;senior&amp;quot;). "
   Nostalgia runs high in transitional age ranges: the teens through 20s
   and over 50 (from "middle-aged" to "senior").
   Image Source/Getty Images

   External triggers for nostalgia are easy to recognize. Looking at old
   pictures, reminiscing about old times or meeting up with a long-lost
   friend will all get you to wistful longing.
--
   hormones" at work in the brain [source: Stern].

   Not a lot is known about the brain's role in nostalgia, but it seems to
   involve connections between stored emotions and memories [source:
   Ostashevsy]. Researchers have connected music-triggered nostalgia with
   increased activity in the prefrontal cortex, which is activated when we
   retrieve autobiographical memories [source: Janata]. Tastes may induce
   nostalgia in part because the neural pathways carrying information from
   the taste buds ultimately lead in part to the limbic system [source:
   Murray]. Scent data lands there, too.
--
   (amygdala) and the "emotional memories" that result when a memory is
   stored during a highly emotional state [sources: Ostashevsy, Phelps,
   Levit]. Scent seems to elicit a stronger sense of nostalgia, as well as
   a more positive and emotional episode, than other triggers [source:
   Reid]. Might be because the olfactory bulb, which processes smell data
--
   travel at all to reach our stored emotional memories.

   We typically think of nostalgia triggers along the lines of these types
   of sensory inputs. Yet one of the most common nostalgia triggers has no
   sensory component at all.

--

   (BUTTON) Copy
   Julia Layton "How Nostalgia Works" 3 June 2015.
   HowStuffWorks.com.
   <lt;https://science.howstuffworks.com/life/inside-the-mind/human-brain/nos
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-23">
<text>
   #Harley Therapy™ Blog » Feed Harley Therapy™ Blog » Comments Feed
   Harley Therapy™ Blog » Nostalgia – is Missing the Past Good or Bad for
   You? Comments Feed alternate alternate alternate

--
   Find a Therapist

Nostalgia – is Missing the Past Good or Bad for You?

   Last reviewed by Dr. Sheri Jacobson Dr. Sheri Jacobson May 16, 2022
   Depression, Relationships
   nostalgia

   photo by Andrea Rico
--
   Often think about your past? Or wish you could go back in time and have
   the life you had? Or the world we all once had before the coronavirus
   pandemic? Nostalgia has direct implications on our mental health.

What is nostalgia?

     Nostalgia is a longing for our past, albeit a possibly romanticised
     version.

--
   even for a version of ourselves we once were.

   Nostalgia is different from homesickness, where we want to be in
   another existing space than the one we are in.

   And it’s not the same as fantasy, where we seek to substitute reality.
   With nostalgia, we know we are in the here and now. We are just
   indulging in a trip down memory lane, while wearing our ‘rose coloured
   glasses’.
--
When being nostalgic is a positive

   In the last century, researchers focussed on nostalgia as something
   negative. It was seen as an inability to accept the past or what we’ve
   lost, and something that stopped us from being in the present.

   But a flurry of more recent research now claims nostalgia as a mental
   health positive. The newer perspective on nostalgia is that it can help
   us feel:
     * more connected (we can remember good times with loved ones and feel
--
       a past, who belongs).

     Researcher Krystine I. Batch, creator of the ’Nostalgia Inventory’,
     analysed memories of resistance fighters in WWII next to current
     empirical research on the subject. This highlighted how nostalgic
--
     helped with accepting a new homeland.

Nostalgia’s dark side

   nostalgia So where does nostalgia go wrong? It’s now thought that there
   is more than one kind of nostalgia, and that not all kinds are helpful.

   Personal nostalgia is when we miss what we experienced in the past.
   It’s the type that leaves us connected and inspired to recreate such
   happy moments in the present and future.

     But we can miss things too soon. This is called ‘anticipatory
     nostalgia’. We miss and long for something before it’s even over,
     and it leads to sadness, worry, and anxiety.  An  American study
     released in 2020 shows that, as well as affecting our reaction,
     poorly timed nostalgia can also affect our ability to learn from our
     reminiscing.

--

   Another 2020 study published in the Journal of Personality and Social
   Psychology concluded that nostalgia can also be negative if it’s random
   and unconscious.

     Consciously making an effort to recall the past was found to elevate
     our moods. But everyday moments of nostalgia were found to be more
     likely to have a negative effect.

Can’t stop reminiscing?

   Are you the type who has daily random nostalgia? Always comparing the
   present unfavourably to the past? Can’t enjoy it when good things
   happen because you are so worried about how much you’ll miss things
   when it’s all over?

   Research and theory aside, you have to look at how nostalgia is making
   you feel. Constantly being caught up in nostalgia that leaves you
   feeling low can be a sign of other issues.

--

   There are unhealthy thought patterns that can be related to, or seem
   like, a form of nostalgia, but are actually signs of a mental health
   issue.

--
   Anxiety means we constantly worry about the future in a way that makes
   us feel fearful, and becomes increasingly illogic. If anticipatory
   nostalgia has started to make you tense and panicky, it might have
   become anxiety.

--
     __________________________________________________________________

   Have a question about nostalgia or want to share your own experience
   with being nostalgic? Use the comment box below.

--
   Leaving a Relationship – How Can You Keep It Sane?
   Choose Your Actions, Choose Your Mood – CBT Behavioral Interventions
   12 Responses to “Nostalgia – is Missing the Past Good or Bad for You?”
    1. Chris Longley
       I have always been quite a nostalgic person. During my life from
--
       think to myself, soak up these feelings of happiness, recollect the
       thoughts and sounds of the moment because nothing lasts forever and
       I know I will look back with nostalgia once it is all gone. Its
       like putting all in a bottle to open up at a later date. I suppose
       I`m acknowledging the happy situation I am in and that it can
--
       Is it possible that during addiction, you become more nostalgic? I
       was an addict, and ever since I’ve been clean, I’ve been anxious
       and I think that nostalgia has a lot to do with it(or at least some
       of it). I’ve been doing a lot of meditation including techniques
       for mindfulness, which helps tremendously. Honestly, I feel like a
--
       Hi Derek, we aren’t quite sure we understand the question. Do you
       mean nostalgic for the time before you were an addict, or for the
       time when you were an addict? Nostalgia can be for any time of our
       life, as every period of life has positives and negatives. Nothing
       is either all good or all bad. When we are an addict the positives
--
       that can feel like a family. There is nothing wrong with missing
       the good bits. that’s normal. But the thing that matters is not
       letting nostalgia blind us from remembering the hell addiction is
       as well. If it helps, keep a journal and write it all out. Perhaps
       write a list of all the positives you miss, but then all the
--
       your head tell you otherwise….Best, HT.
    7. Diego
       Im trying to figure out how to deal with the “anticipaty nostalgia”
       im feeling right now. Every Olympics games I try to watch every
       sport cause I really enjoyed it, but sometimes I catch myself
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-24">
<text>
   Medically reviewed by Matthew Boland, PhD — By Crystal Raypole on July
   14, 2021
     * Nostalgia and depression
     * Benefits of nostalgia
     * How to cope
     * Finding support
--
   PinterestJoscha Malburg/EyeEm/GettyImages

   Nostalgia refers to those wistful, sentimental feelings that surface
   when you recall significant experiences, relationships, places, and
   other bits of the past.

   Often, nostalgia inspires positive emotions — a sense of meaningfulness
   or life purpose, social connection, and optimism. But it can have a
   downside, too — a lingering aftertaste with an unpleasant bite.
--
Once upon a time

   Experts did consider nostalgia a mental health condition at one point.
   Physician Johannes Hofer first used the term in the late 1600s to
   describe the anxiety, homesickness, disordered eating, insomnia, and
--
   fighting away from home.

   By the 1800s, nostalgia was considered more of a melancholic depression
   tinged with homesickness and loss.
   In the late 1900s, sociologist Fred Davis began to draw clear
   distinctions between nostalgia and homesickness. Others took his work
   further, highlighting nostalgia’s possible consequences and potential
   benefits.

   The link between nostalgia and depression

   A glimpse of a familiar face, the refrain of a long-forgotten song, a
--
Worry and rumination

   Nostalgia might cast a longer shadow if you have a habit of worrying or
   often find yourself fixating on dark and unwanted thoughts.

   A 2012 study explored potential negative effects of nostalgia in a
   sample of over 200 adults. The participants, most of whom were
   university students, answered questions about their:
--
   keep.

   Research from 2020 exploring the effects of nostalgia on well-being
   called nostalgia a “mixed emotion,” one that can have both positive and
   negative effects.

   Through several diary studies, researchers found evidence to suggest
   that nostalgia can sometimes create a cycle of distress:
     * You might notice spontaneous nostalgia as you go about your day,
       especially after unpleasant events, like a fight with your partner
       or a bad day at work.
--
       negative thoughts. Eventually, you could begin to feel sad, even
       somewhat depressed.
     * This distress can, in turn, prompt further nostalgia.

   What’s more, existing feelings of depression or sadness can lay yet
--
Loneliness and loss

   Nostalgia often surfaces when thinking of loved ones, both those you
   haven’t encountered in some time and those you no longer spend time
   with.

   If you lost a friend or loved one and feel like you never got real
   closure, this nostalgia may feel even more distressing.

   Anticipatory nostalgia, or a longing for someone or something you
   haven’t yet lost, can also trigger anxiety and preemptive sadness.

--
   yourself missing them well before they’re gone.

   The upside of nostalgia

   All that being said, nostalgia isn’t always negative. In fact, experts
   have associated it with several positive aspects of emotional
   well-being:
--
       important experiences can remind you that life has value and
       meaning — even if it didn’t turn out exactly how you predicted.
     * Belonging and connection. Nostalgia may sometimes contribute to
       feelings of loneliness, but 2020 research also suggested it can
       help you feel more connected to others. Thinking of the people you
--
       toward goals and improve circumstances you aren’t happy with.

   Nostalgia could even inspire you to get help for depression.

   In a 2020 study, researchers created two different announcements for
   the campus counseling center for 148 university students living with
   depression. One announcement was specifically designed to trigger
   feelings of nostalgia.

   The students who watched the nostalgic announcement reported
--

   Instead of drawing comparisons between “now” and “then,” harnessing
   your nostalgia can help you cultivate gratitude for defining life
   events or people who truly changed your life.

--
Seek out fulfilling relationships

   When nostalgia leads to yearning for lost friends and loved ones, you
   can challenge feelings of loneliness by turning toward the important
   people in your present.
--

   A mental health professional might not diagnose nostalgic depression,
   but they can offer support when nostalgia leads to lingering emotional
   distress.

--
   present.

   Some evidence suggests spontaneous nostalgia, or the recollections that
   come up in daily life, tends to have more of a negative impact than the
   nostalgic feelings that come up when someone asks you to recall a
--
     * recognize potential triggers for these feelings
     * create strategies to counter rumination
     * explore strategies to cope with nostalgia productively
     * identify symptoms of anxiety, depression, or other underlying
       mental health concerns
--
   avoid using tertiary references. You can learn more about how we ensure
   our content is accurate and current by reading our editorial policy.
     * Abeyta AA, et al. (2020). Combating loneliness with nostalgia:
       Nostalgic feelings attenuate negative thoughts and motivations
       associated with loneliness.
       frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01219/full
     * Batcho K. (2019). Speaking of psychology: Does nostalgia have a
       psychological purpose?
       apa.org/research/action/speaking-of-psychology/nostalgia
     * Batcho KI. (2020). When nostalgia tilts to sad: Anticipatory and
       personal nostalgia.
       frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01186/full
     * Bridge DJ, et al. (2012). Neural correlates of reactivation and
       retrieval-induced distortion.
       jneurosci.org/content/32/35/12144
     * Newman DB, et al. (2020). Nostalgia and well-being in daily life:
       An ecological validity perspective.
       ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7513922
     * Hussain SA, et al. (2020). Effect of nostalgia as a motivational
       force for depressed students to seek professional psychological
       help.
--
       ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4927028
     * Routledge C, et al. (2011). The past makes the present meaningful:
       Nostalgia as an existential resource.
       psycnet.apa.org/record/2011-15473-001
     * Routledge C, et al. (2013). Nostalgia as a resource for
       psychological health and well-being.
       psycnet.apa.org/record/2013-38800-004
     * Sedikides C, et al. (2008). Nostalgia: Past, present, and future.
       researchgate.net/publication/313213209_Nostalgia_past_present_and_f
       uture
     * Verplanken B. (2012). When bittersweet turns sour: Adverse effects
       of nostalgia on habitual worriers.
       psych.hanover.edu/Research/exponnetresults/Verplanken%20(2012).pdf
     * Wildschut T, et al. (2008). Nostalgia — From cowbells to the
       meaning of life.
       thepsychologist.bps.org.uk/volume-21/edition-1/nostalgia-cowbells-m
       eaning-life
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-25">
<text>
   Thinking

   Many people remember the “good old days” with nostalgia, others with
   tears in their eyes because those childhood days were good or bad or so
   different from today’s world. We all have different opinions about
--
   6.2 We Cannot Control How Our Lives Began but We Can Control Our
   Present and Our Future
   7 Nostalgia Is Helpful When It Leads Us to Be Grateful for What We’ve
   Achieved
   8 When You’re Feeling Down, It Can Often Help to Look Back on Fond
   Memories
   8.1 It Might Even Motivate You to Make Progress on Your Current Goals!
   9 Don’t Use Nostalgia to Run Away From Your Problems
   10 Childhood Memories Can Hold Important Information That Helps Us
   Navigate Our Lives Now
--

   If you’re having a hard time living in the present when you think about
   the past, it’s called nostalgia-which means “deep longing or
   homesickness for the past”-and is generally perceived as a positive or
   negative emotion. Or perhaps even bittersweet?
--
   helps us progress in life.

Nostalgia Is Helpful When It Leads Us to Be Grateful for What We’ve Achieved

   Thinking about the past is natural and can be helpful.
--
   if you just look for them more often.

   Nostalgia can hold us back just as easily as it can propel us forward.
   When we spend time thinking about the past instead of planning for the
   future, our goals can fall by the wayside.
--
When You’re Feeling Down, It Can Often Help to Look Back on Fond Memories

   Nostalgia is a form of self-care – a reminder that the past had its
   good points, too, and that there’s still plenty to look forward to.

--
It Might Even Motivate You to Make Progress on Your Current Goals!

   Nostalgia can also be a form of escapism, as it distracts us from our
   current problems or helps us avoid them.

   Nostalgia can also be a form of escapism, as it distracts us from our
   current problems or serves to help us avoid them. For example, you
   might avoid dealing with your marital problems by reminiscing about the
--
   the current relationship problems.

   Since nostalgia can be used as a distraction to avoid certain problems,
   it’s important that we don’t abuse it and instead use it in a
   productive way. To accomplish this, let’s look at some common ways we
   can abuse nostalgia and how you can tell if you’re using nostalgia as a
   distraction.

Don’t Use Nostalgia to Run Away From Your Problems

   When people have unresolved issues in their relationships, they often
   use nostalgia as an excuse to avoid dealing with those issues.

   The problem is that while they’re stuck in the past, they aren’t making
--
   excuse not to work on their problems.

   Nostalgia isn’t about “all or nothing” – you don’t have to think back
   only to the good or bad times. Instead, think about the good and bad
   things that happened in your life, and don’t try to see something
   through rose-colored glasses.

   When we use nostalgia as a form of escapism and avoid seeing both the
   good and the bad from our past, it can cause us to avoid dealing with
   our current problems and get stuck in the past.
--
   member, but instead of working on those problems, you spend all your
   time thinking about the past ups and downs of your relationship, that’s
   one way nostalgia can be used as an escape mechanism.

   You’re trying to escape from something negative in your life by
   focusing on the positive aspects of something else. While this is
   natural, it’s unhealthy when you overuse nostalgia to escape from
   things. If you find yourself doing this, try to figure out why you feel
   the need to escape what’s happening.
--
   our memories of the past to guide our actions in the future.

   The third reason nostalgia helps us deal with our problems is that it
   allows us to avoid dealing with those very problems. For example, if
   you spend all your free time thinking about the good old days when you
   were a young adult instead of working to solve a problem that’s
   bothering you today, then nostalgia may play an unfavorable role in
   managing your emotions and stressors.

--
   and what we think it’s in our minds.

   Lovers of nostalgia can wander through their own time capsules,
   reliving their favorite moments from their youth and longing for the
   life they could’ve lived had they not failed (or not failed so often).
--
   When I look back, I see that my life has been full of ups and downs
   since elementary school! When we look back on our childhood, most of us
   probably feel some degree of happy nostalgia and painful memories –
   memories of past childhood activities, friendships, or toys may put a
   smile on our face. Many people look back on their teenage years or the
   first few years after leaving home as the best days of their lives.

   For me, nostalgia is like time travel, and I enjoy the good times and
   the bad times like watching a movie.

--

   American Psychological Association – Speaking of Psychology: Does
   nostalgia have a psychological purpose?

   American Psychological Association – Memories of Childhood Abuse
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-26">
<text>
    #Manipal The Talk Network » Feed Manipal The Talk Network » Comments
   Feed Manipal The Talk Network » The Neurology of Nostalgia—Why Do We
   Long for the Past? Comments Feed alternate alternate

--
   Open Search

The Neurology of Nostalgia—Why Do We Long for the Past?


--


   Nostalgia is defined as “a feeling of pleasure and also slight sadness
   when you think about things that happened in the past”, by the
   Cambridge Dictionary. The term nostalgia encompasses that bittersweet
   feeling of recollecting fond memories of the past. From flipping
   through photo albums to scrolling through your photo gallery, from
--

   Derived from the Greek words “nostos” (meaning homecoming) and “algos”
   (meaning pain/ache), nostalgia used to have negative associations
   historically and was often thought of as a disease. However, the
   meaning of the word has metamorphosed over the years. Present-day
   research portrays an entirely different story that has unraveled behind
   the scenes, through experiments and studies. These studies have found
   that nostalgia can enrich resilience and happiness amongst humans.
   Further, the more nostalgia that is experienced, the more optimistic a
   person is likely to become.


Nostalgia in Neurology: Your brain rewards you and is proud of you!

   Experiencing nostalgia cannot be limited by viewing it as solely a
   feeling. Although nostalgia is defined appropriately, it is often used
   loosely — ignoring the implications it has on the human mind and brain
   function.
--
   visual and cosy memory that makes you smile? Or perhaps a whiff of some
   flower that takes you back to your grandmother’s garden? Some factors
   like smell, music or scenery can trigger nostalgia in us. The trigger
   of nostalgia is usually an environmental factor such as a conversation
   with a childhood friend, or a certain significant date. However, it may
   also involve instinctive remembrance of the past.

   Every time nostalgia is experienced, a part of the brain is activated.
   The performance and activity of the brain’s reward systems and memory
   system are altered through stimulation. This includes the hippocampus —
--
   When the reward systems in the brain are triggered, a chemical known as
   Dopamine is released. Researchers have led experiments using Magnetic
   Resonance Imaging (MRI) scans to reveal that when nostalgia is felt,
   there is a close link between the release of dopamine and memories in
   the hippocampus. The dopamine deposits itself directly in the
--


   In this sense, nostalgia itself can be considered to be a type of
   reward since it allows us to relive memories of the past. This also
   explains how when you think about specific memories or details
--

   Thus, in our constant stride towards the future, recalling and reliving
   happy memories from the past and creating the feeling of nostalgia, as
   a result, can lead to boosted levels of happiness, and reduced stress
   levels.


Nostalgia Marketing: Your Fond Memories of the Past—Offer Valid Till Stocks
Last!

   Over the years, the powerhouses of the world — politicians, marketers
   and large organizations — have taken to nostalgia as a trick under
   their sleeves. Since nostalgia brings back strong emotion, it is easily
   used as an appeal, ploying the common person to create connections.

--
   Washing Powder Nirma, Parle-G biscuits, Frooti — these are just some of
   several Indian brands that established themselves years ago and took to
   nostalgia marketing decades later. The reason they are able to do
   brilliantly in the market even today is because their brand recall
   value is immensely powerful. Their products are purchased and
   advertisements watched because viewers are able to feel an emotional
   connect and nostalgia of their childhood days.


   An often-used proverb, old is gold, is particularly relevant here.
   Nostalgia marketing taps into emotions and connectedness, taking people
   for a trip down memory lane. A marketers’ target audience is likely to
   remain loyal if they can connect to the brand. Nostalgia marketing
   allows brands to acknowledge the present without letting go of the
   past. Consumers today are able to re-experience the past through
--
   to the advertisement, it translates into a connection with the brand.

Cultural Implications of Nostalgia


     Nostalgia is like a grammar lesson: you find the present tense, but
     the past perfect!

--

   A Professor of Sociology and Personality Psychology,  Constantine
   Sedikides, describes Nostalgia as the “perfect internal politician,
   connecting the past with the present, pointing optimistically to the
   future.” Nostalgia has the power to bring a group of people closer and
   allows a person to establish a better connection with themselves.


   Through the knowledge of its impact and a deeper dive into how
   nostalgia works — the benefit of nostalgia can be applied to personal
   lives. Nostalgia can be a harbinger of a sense of calm and joy.
   However, treading carefully on this front is a must, because it doesn’t
   take much for nostalgia to become a cycle of negativity. “Those were
   simpler times, can’t we just go back to those days?” are especially
   common thoughts when recalling childhood memories. Instead of trying to
--
   between where you are today and where you were years ago. This can also
   be a signal of growth and positive change. It is also important to
   acknowledge how the moments that cause nostalgia today have augmented
   life over the years.

Childhood and the Nostalgic effect on Decisions

   As said before, nostalgia arises from memories, and typically it starts
   when we become young adults. So usually nostalgia is shaped a lot by
   childhood memories— a time when there were almost no responsibilities
   and when our thoughts and vision of the world were a lot simpler. It
--
   would refuse to think otherwise.

Nostalgia and Dreams

   Dreams and memories have a rather interesting connection. It has been
--
   Hence a dream can actually create contact between us and people we
   haven’t met for a long time. It can show us places from far away
   memories and thus trigger nostalgia in us. It can let us interact with
   our past memories or fond experiences and be a great source of comfort
   to us. Sometimes we might even feel very strong emotions and the dream
   may seem so real that they are more impactful than real-life emotions.

Nostalgia as Therapy

   Nostalgia may be a bittersweet state of mind, but when looked at
   deeply, its positive aspects outweigh the negative. After all, it’s a
   filtered recollection of our memories. It is there to trigger
--
   us feel more human and closer to people around us. It can rekindle
   relationships and strengthen bonds in newly formed ones. When we feel
   hopeless, nostalgia can remind us that there’s scope for making good
   memories in future and helps us to push through the tough times.

   For people who feel detached from their past selves, nostalgia is a
   great tool to create a sense of self-continuity and remind them of the
   factors that haven’t changed in our personalities. Many people might
   feel that their lives have been for nought, that there were no
   contributions from their side. Nostalgia can make them realise the
   value of human interactions and every other beautiful memory they
   created in the past.
--
   General, Informative

   dreams, neurology, Nostalgia

Post navigation
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-27">
<text>
   Newsletter
   Free Ebook
   Nostalgia: A Beautiful Suffering
   September 27, 2014
   Culture
   Alex Hughes
   Nostalgia: A Beautiful Suffering

   Alex Hughes
--
   Culture

Nostalgia: A Beautiful Suffering

   Alex Hughes
--
   Culture

   Nostalgia can be many things. It’s the feeling of the first spring day
   when the sun starts to warm your bones after a long winter, reminding
   you of the endless possibilities of the impending summer. Nostalgia is
   the song you set to repeat and belted out with the windows down on your
   first road trip, free from your parents. It’s also the song that was
   the soundtrack to an early heartbreak, whose lyrics rang truer than
   even your own words. Nostalgia is passing a stranger who wears the same
   fragrance as an old love, casting you back into a storm of unfiltered
   emotion you thought you’d overcome. Much like it’s also the music that
--
   moment where your entire world was completely calm.

   The common definition of nostalgia is a variation of: “A sentimental
   longing or wistful affection for the past, typically for a period or
   place with happy personal associations.” However, this doesn’t quite do
--
   rekindled, often without warning, by sensory experiences of the
   surrounding world, unlocking the floodgates to past emotions.
   Many view nostalgia as a crippling inertia that should be avoided at
   all costs. It is incredibly powerful and if given the opportunity, has
   the potential to stop you dead in your tracks. However, in small doses
   there’s a certain beauty to it. It can ignite moments of reflection,
   inspiration, and reconnect us to both our younger self and others.
   Creative minds seem more prone to nostalgia because we have a tendency
   to romanticize the past - not just the good, but the bad, heartbreak
   and all. We don’t necessarily long for that situation, but rather the
   raw emotion. Moments of nostalgia take us back to memories of the
   extremes, heartbreak and bliss, often the best reminders that we’re
   alive. We certainly prefer the highs, but the lows are just as much a
--
   level of equilibrium, but this leaves much to be desired. At times we
   need to feel the rise and fall of the waves.
   Regardless of the sentiment attached, nostalgia leaves us with a
   strange feeling somewhere between pleasure and the sharp sting of pain.
   It’s bittersweet. We ache to reconnect with our younger self, which can
   be for a handful of reasons. The one consistency in these moments is a
   desire to feel.
   If there were such a thing as a purest form of nostalgia, it would be
   those connections that lead back to childhood. Most of us associate
   memories of our childhood with innocence and joy. Times before we knew
   deception, brokenness, or the weight of responsibility. Nostalgia
   linked to childhood reveals that we were fortunate enough to have one.
   It shows gratitude and affection for that period of life.
--
   childhood is and that we should do our best to afford future
   generations the same privilege.
   Nostalgia that leads back to past relationships is similar in the sense
   that it reconnects us with a younger, more naïve version of ourselves,
   but can be much different in the range of emotions recalled. This
--
   that we’ve grown since. There’s a certain satisfaction in realizing
   lessons, once we’re far enough removed to look back.
   The happiness we find in nostalgia that leads to memories of love needs
   little explanation, as it’s one of our most basic desires. Love lost,
   on the other hand, is the most intriguing as to how we can possibly be
--
   a reminder of what it’s like to feel something so deeply, proving both
   our delicateness and resilience.
   Nostalgia can stir up any memory under the sun, not just childhood or
   relationships. It connects us back to achievements, adventures,
   experiences, friendships, and places; the list is inexhaustible. The
   triggers for these connections are even more diverse and unique to each
   of us. The only universal truth to nostalgia is its unusual blend
   between happiness and melancholy. However, a desire to turn back time
   and live briefly in that moment isn’t an inherently bad thing. It
   allows us to revisit a small part of our past and consider what makes
   us the person we are today.
   Moments of nostalgia also offer a powerful tool for creative minds. To
   create something influential that touches the lives of others, you need
   to establish an emotional connection in some way. Sometimes it demands
   that you dig deep and embrace nostalgia to revive the emotion
   surrounding a situation. If you’re able to peel back the layers and
   explore why a certain experience has such a strong connection, you
   might be able to recreate that for others. Briefly immersing yourself
   allows you to create honestly and potentially strike a chord with
   someone facing a similar situation or emotion. Moments of nostalgia can
   offer clarity, a forgotten perspective, or help us connect with those
   around us.
   Unfortunately, we can drown in nostalgia, dwelling long enough that it
   begins to interfere with the present. Nostalgia can come without
   warning and with a full head of steam, but it cannot be allowed to
   consume us for extended periods of time. The present must always be
--
   moment. It’s in the things we’ve done today and the finer details all
   around us: the colors, emotions, scents, and sounds. The power that
   nostalgia carries should help inform our present decisions and
   observations.
   Nostalgia should be embraced like an old friend who stops by on
   occasion but never sticks around too long. It’s a gift that offers a
   window back to our younger self, the real emotions we felt, and what
   makes us the person we are today. Be cautious, but appreciate these
   moments. They can be harnessed for good and inspiration.
   Quite simply, nostalgia is a beautiful suffering.

   Tagged: Nostalgia, Nostalgic, Perspective

   Newer PostChasing Adventure: A Forgotten Perspective
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-28">
<text>
Why Are Happy Memories so Sad and Melancholic?

When nostalgia puts your heart on edge…

   Photo by Isaque Pereira from Pexels
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-29">
<text>

</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-2">
<text>
   #alternate Edit this page Wikipedia (en)

Nostalgia

   From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
   Jump to navigation Jump to search
   Feeling sentimentality for the past
   For other uses, see Nostalgia (disambiguation).
   The archives director for The Saturday Evening Post said that the
   magazine has been regarded with "a mixture of nostalgia and
   affection".^[1] Shown: a Norman Rockwell cover from August 1924.
   Part of a series on
--
     * Love
     * Lust
     * Nostalgia
     * Outrage
     * Panic
--
     * e

   Nostalgia is a sentimentality for the past, typically for a period or
   place with happy personal associations.^[2] The word nostalgia is a
   learned formation of a Greek compound, consisting of νόστος (nóstos),
   meaning "homecoming", a Homeric word, and ἄλγος (álgos), meaning
--
   Romanticism.^[2]

   Nostalgia is associated with a longing for the past, its personalities,
   possibilities, and events, especially the "good ol' days" or a "warm
   childhood".^[5] There is a predisposition, caused by cognitive biases
--
   intolerably bleak."^[9]

   The scientific literature on nostalgia usually refers to nostalgia
   regarding one's personal life and has mainly studied the effects of
   nostalgia as induced during these studies. Emotion is a strong evoker
   of nostalgia due to the processing of these stimuli first passing
   through the amygdala, the emotional seat of the brain. These
   recollections of one's past are usually important events, people one
--
   such as music,^[10] movies, television shows,^[11] and video
   games,^[12] as well as natural phenomena such as weather and
   environment^[13] can also be strong triggers of nostalgia.
   [ ]

--
Functions[edit]

   Nostalgia's definition has changed greatly over time. Consistent with
   its Greek word roots meaning "homecoming" and "pain," nostalgia was for
   centuries considered a potentially debilitating and sometimes fatal
   medical condition expressing extreme homesickness.^[4] The modern view
   is that nostalgia is an independent, and even positive, emotion that
   many people experience often. Nostalgia has been found to have
   important psychological functions, such as to improve mood, increase
   social connectedness, enhance positive self-regard, and provide
--
   one function, and overall seem to benefit those who experience them.
   Such benefits may lead to a chronic disposition or personality trait of
   "nostalgia proneness."^[15]^[16] Nostalgia has also been associated
   with learning and memory consolidation.^[17]

Improve mood[edit]

   Although nostalgia is often triggered by negative feelings, it results
   in increasing one's mood and heightening positive emotions, which can
   stem from feelings of warmth or coping resulting from nostalgic
   reflections. One way to improve mood is to effectively cope with
   problems that hinder one's happiness. Batcho (2013) found that
   nostalgia proneness positively related to successful methods of coping
   throughout all stages—planning and implementing strategies, and
   reframing the issue positively. These studies led to the conclusion
   that the coping strategies that are likely among nostalgia-prone people
   often lead to benefits during stressful times. Nostalgia can be
   connected to more focus on coping strategies and implementing them,
   thus increasing support in challenging times.^[18]
--
   Tweed run, 2013

   Nostalgia also sometimes involves memories of people one was close to,
   and thus it can increase one's sense of social support and connections.
   Nostalgia is also triggered specifically by feelings of loneliness, but
   counteracts such feelings with reflections of close relationships.
   According to Zhou et al. (2008), lonely people often have lesser
   perceptions of social support. Loneliness, however, leads to nostalgia,
   which actually increases perceptions of social support. Thus, Zhou and
   colleagues (2008) concluded that nostalgia serves a restorative
   function for individuals regarding their social connectedness.^[19]

   A desire for more social interaction is often the motivation for
   historical reenactments, which bring together people with a shared
   nostalgia for historical periods of past times. These events' hands-on,
   improvisational natures often facilitate socialization.^[20]

Enhance positive self-regard[edit]

   Nostalgia serves as a coping mechanism and helps people to feel better
   about themselves. Vess et al. (2012) found that the subjects who
   thought of nostalgic memories showed greater accessibility of positive
--
Provide existential meaning[edit]

   Nostalgia helps increase one's self-esteem and meaning in life by
   buffering threats to well-being and also by initiating a desire to deal
   with problems or stress. Routledge (2011) and colleagues found that
   nostalgia correlates positively with one's sense of meaning in life.
   The second study revealed that nostalgia increases one's perceived
   meaning in life, which was thought to be mediated by a sense of social
   support or connectedness. Thirdly, the researchers found that
   threatened meaning can even act as a trigger for nostalgia, thus
   increasing one's nostalgic reflections. By triggering nostalgia,
   though, one's defensiveness to such threat is minimized as found in the
   fourth study. The final two studies found that nostalgia is able to not
   only create meaning but buffer threats to meaning by breaking the
   connection between a lack of meaning and one's well-being. Follow-up
   studies also completed by Routledge in 2012 not only found meaning as a
   function of nostalgia, but also concluded that nostalgic people have
   greater perceived meaning, search for meaning less, and can better
   buffer existential threat.^[22]^[23]
--
Promote psychological growth[edit]

   Nostalgia makes people more willing to engage in growth-oriented
   behaviors and encourages them to view themselves as growth-oriented
   people. Baldwin &amp; Landau (2014) found that nostalgia leads people to
   rate themselves higher on items like "I am the kind of person who
   embraces unfamiliar people, events, and places." Nostalgia also
   increased interest in growth-related behavior such as "I would like to
   explore someplace that I have never been before." In the first study,
   these effects were statistically mediated by nostalgia-induced positive
   affect—the extent to which nostalgia made participants feel good. In
   the second study, nostalgia led to the same growth outcomes but the
   effects were statistically mediated by nostalgia-induced
   self-esteem.^[24]

As a deception[edit]

   One recent study critiques the idea of nostalgia, which in some forms
   can become a defense mechanism by which people avoid the historical
   facts.^[25] This study looked at the different portrayals of apartheid
   in South Africa and argued that nostalgia appears as two ways,^[26]
   'restorative nostalgia' a wish to return to that past, and 'reflective
   nostalgia' which is more critically aware.

As a comfort[edit]
--
   suggests that by invoking the idea of an idealized past, politicians
   can provoke the social and cultural anxieties and uncertainties that
   make nostalgia especially attractive—and effective—as a tool of
   political persuasion.^[29]^[30]

--
Books[edit]

   A person can deliberately trigger feelings of nostalgia by listening to
   familiar music, looking at old photos, or visiting comforting
   environments of the past.^[31] With this knowledge widely available,
   many books have been published specifically to evoke the feeling of
   nostalgia. Books are just one of many media used in the monetization of
   nostalgia^[32]^[circular reference].

Music[edit]
--
   Hearing an old song can bring back memories for a person. A song heard
   once at a specific moment and then not heard again until a far later
   date will give the listener a sense of nostalgia for the date
   remembered and events that occurred then. However, if it is heard
   throughout life, it may lose its association with any specific period
--
Movies[edit]

   Old movies can trigger nostalgia. This is particularly true for
   generations who grew up as children during specific film eras such as
   the animation renaissance of the 1990s. Rewatching classic movies can
--
TV shows[edit]

   Old television shows can trigger nostalgia. People gravitate towards
   shows they watched as children, as the memories from one's youth are
   often the most significant of their lives.^[11]
--
Video games[edit]

   Old video games can trigger nostalgia. Retro gaming has become a
   recreational activity among older generations who played them as
   children.^[12]
--

   Nature-based factors such as weather and temperature can trigger
   nostalgia. Scientific studies have shown that cold weather makes people
   more nostalgic, while nostalgia causes people to feel warmer.^[13] In
   some societies, elements of nature often trigger a nostalgia for past
   times when nature played a larger role in culture.^[33] Environmental
   philosopher Glenn Albrecht coined the term 'solastalgia' in his 2003
--
   word is formed from the Latin sōlācium (comfort) and the Greek root
   ἄλγος (pain, suffering) to describe a form of emotional or existential
   distress caused by environmental destruction. Nostalgia differs from
   solastalgia because nostalgia is typically generated by spatial
   separation from important places or persons (one's home, one's family,
   or loved ones) with which it is often possible, in principle, to
--

   The term was coined in 1688 by Johannes Hofer (1669–1752) in his Basel
   dissertation. Hofer introduced nostalgia or mal du pays "homesickness"
   for the condition also known as mal du Suisse "Swiss illness", because
   of its frequent occurrence in Swiss mercenaries who in the plains of
--
   thought to include fainting, high fever, and death.

   English homesickness is a loan translation of nostalgia. Sir Joseph
   Banks used the word in his journal during the first voyage of Captain
   Cook. On 3 September 1770 he stated that the sailors "were now pretty
   far gone with the longing for home which the Physicians have gone so
   far as to esteem a disease under the name of Nostalgia", but his
   journal was not published in his lifetime.^[35] Cases resulting in
   death were known and soldiers were sometimes successfully treated by
--

   In the eighteenth century, scientists were looking for a locus of
   nostalgia, a nostalgic bone. By the 1850s nostalgia was losing its
   status as a particular disease and coming to be seen rather as a
   symptom or stage of a pathological process. It was considered as a form
   of melancholia and a predisposing condition among suicides. Nostalgia
   was, however, still diagnosed among soldiers as late as the American
   Civil War.^[36] By the 1870s interest in nostalgia as a medical
   category had almost completely vanished. Nostalgia was still being
   recognized in both the First and Second World Wars, especially by the
   American armed forces. Great lengths were taken to study and understand
--
   (see the BBC documentary Century of the Self).

   Nostalgia is triggered by something reminding an individual of an event
   or item from their past. The resulting emotion can vary from happiness
   to sorrow. The term "feeling nostalgic" is more commonly used to
--
Romanticism[edit]

   Swiss nostalgia was linked to the singing of Kuhreihen, which were
   forbidden to Swiss mercenaries because they led to nostalgia to the
   point of desertion, illness or death. The 1767 Dictionnaire de Musique
   by Jean-Jacques Rousseau claims that Swiss mercenaries were threatened
--
   Chalet by Adolphe Charles Adam (1834) which was performed for Queen
   Victoria under the title The Swiss Cottage. The Romantic connection of
   nostalgia, was a significant factor in the enthusiasm for Switzerland
   and the development of early Tourism in Switzerland that took hold of
   the European cultural elite in the 19th century. German Romanticism
--
In rhetoric and communication[edit]

   Nostalgia has been frequently studied as a tool of rhetoric and
   persuasion. Communication scholar Stephen Depoe,^[37] for example,
   writes that in nostalgic messaging: “a speaker highlights a comparison
   between a more favorable, idealized past and a less favorable present
   in order to stimulate [nostalgia]. . . . [linking] his/her own policies
   to qualities of the idealized past in order to induce support” (179).
   Rhetorician William Kurlinkus^[38]^[39] taxonomizes nostalgia on this
   foundation, arguing that nostalgic rhetoric generally contains three
   parts:
    1. A loss or threat in the present: the chaotic change that nostalgia
       responds to. Though some theorists^[40] argue that the ideal must
       truly be lost, other scholars including Kurlinkus argue that the
       ideal may simply be threatened to trigger nostalgia.
    2. A nostalgic crux: a person, group, corporation, et al. that is
       blamed for the loss of the nostalgic ideal. To perform such
--
       source of recovering the good memory. Such cruxes have include
       groups from polluting corporations to immigrants.
    3. Hope: Finally, Kurlinkus argues that though nostalgia is often
       performed ironically it almost always has a true hope for
       recovering the god memory (whether this means some kind of true
       restoration or a more symbolic recovery of an ethic). Such hope
       differentiates nostalgia from similar emotions like melancholia,
       which contains all of nostalgia's longing for lost ideals without a
       desire to move out of that past.

--
As an advertising tool[edit]

   In media and advertising, nostalgia-evoking images, sounds, and
   references can be used strategically to create a sense of connectedness
   between consumers and products with the goal of convincing the public
   to consume, watch, or buy advertised products.^[41] Modern technology
   facilitates nostalgia-eliciting advertising through the subject, style,
   and design of an advertisement.^[42] The feeling of longing for the
   past is easily communicated through social media and advertising
--
   experienced a specific event or moment in time in order to feel
   nostalgic for it. This is due to a phenomenon referred to as vicarious
   nostalgia. Vicarious nostalgia is a feeling of wistful yearning for a
   moment that occurred prior to, or outside of, the span of one's memory,
   but is relatable (has sentimental value) due to repeated mediated
   exposure to it.^[43] The constant propagating of advertisements and
   other media messages makes vicarious nostalgia possible, and changes
   the ways we understand advertisements and subsequently, the way
   consumers use their purchasing power.

   Examples of nostalgia used to provoke public interest include
   nostalgia-themed websites^[44] such as The Nostalgia Machine and
   DoYouRemember?, and revamps of old movies,^[45] TV shows, and books.
   Vintage, rustic and old-fashioned design styles can also be seen in
   nostalgia-based ad campaigns that companies such as Coca-Cola and Levi
   Strauss &amp; Co. use.^[43]

   Developed within the marketing discipline, forestalgia[1], defined as
   an individual's yearning for an idealized future, serves as a
   future-focused counterpart to nostalgia.^[46] Like nostalgia, where
   only the happy memories are retained, forestalgia explains customers’
   intentions to escape the present to a romanticized future where current
   concerns are no longer an issue. Marketing researchers found that when
   promoting hedonic and utilitarian products, far-past nostalgia and
   far-future forestalgia advertisements were most effective in the
   promotion of utilitarian products. In contrast, hedonic products were
   better suited for advertisements framed in far-past nostalgia or
   near-future forestalgia.

--
     * Historic preservation
     * Mono no aware
     * Nostalgia industry
     * Nostalgia for the Soviet Union
     * Neo-Stalinism
     * Nostalgia Night
     * Old-time radio
     * Ostalgie
--
     * Vaporwave
     * Vintage (design)
     * Yugo-nostalgia

References[edit]
--
       Years". Inside Indiana Business. Archived from the original on
       November 19, 2021.
    2. ^ ^a ^b Boym, Svetlana (2002). The Future of Nostalgia. Basic
       Books. pp. xiii–xiv. ISBN 978-0-465-00708-0.
    3. ^ Fuentenebro; de Diego, F; Valiente, C (2014). "Nostalgia: a
       conceptual history". History of Psychiatry. 25 (4): 404–411.
       doi:10.1177/0957154X14545290. PMID 25395438.
--
       original on March 1, 2016.
    5. ^ Sedikides, Constantine; Wildschut, Tim; Arndt, Jamie; Routledge,
       Clay (October 2008). "Nostalgia: Past, Present, and Future".
       Current Directions in Psychological Science. 17 (5): 304–307.
       doi:10.1111/j.1467-8721.2008.00595.x. S2CID 220389609.
--
    9. ^ Lewis, Jemima (January 16, 2016). "Why we yearn for the good old
       days". The Telegraph. Retrieved 20 December 2016.
   10. ^ ^a ^b "Music-Evoked Nostalgia".
   11. ^ ^a ^b ^c Nelakonda, Divya. "Binging on nostalgia – why we replay
       TV from our youth". the Epic. Retrieved 2022-01-14.
   12. ^ ^a ^b McCarthy, Anne. "Why Retro-Looking Games Get So Much Love".
       Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Retrieved 2022-01-14.
   13. ^ ^a ^b "Study: Nostalgia Makes Us Warm, and Cold Makes Us
       Nostalgic". The Atlantic. 2012-12-04.
   14. ^ Wildschut, Tim; Sedikides, Constantine; Arndt, Jamie; Routledge,
       Clay (2006). "Nostalgia: Content, triggers, functions" (PDF).
       Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 91 (5): 975–993.
       doi:10.1037/0022-3514.91.5.975. PMID 17059314.
--
       ISBN 978-3640942268.
   16. ^ Schindler, Robert M.; Holbrook, Morris B. (2003-04-01).
       "Nostalgia for early experience as a determinant of consumer
       preferences". Psychology and Marketing. 20 (4): 275–302.
       CiteSeerX 10.1.1.520.403. doi:10.1002/mar.10074. ISSN 1520-6793.
--
       Neuroscience. 11 (7): 1069–1077. doi:10.1093/scan/nsv073.
       PMC 4927028. PMID 26060325.
   18. ^ Batcho, K. I. (2013). "Nostalgia: Retreat or support in difficult
       times?" The American Journal of Psychology,
   19. ^ Zhou, X.; Sedikides, C.; Wildschut, T.; Gao, D. (2008).
       "Counteracting loneliness: On the restorative function of
       nostalgia" (PDF). Psychological Science. 19 (10): 1023–1029.
       doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02194.x. PMID 19000213.
       S2CID 45398320.
   20. ^ Howard Giles. "A Brief History of Re-enactment".
   21. ^ Vess, M.; Arndt, J.; Routledge, C.; Sedikides, C.; Wildschut, T.
       (2012). "Nostalgia as a resource for the self". Self and Identity.
       11 (3): 273–284. doi:10.1080/15298868.2010.521452. S2CID 56018071.
   22. ^ Routledge, C.; Arndt, J.; Wildschut, T.; Sedikides, C.; Hart, C.
       M. (2011). "The past makes the present meaningful: Nostalgia as an
       existential resource". Journal of Personality and Social
       Psychology. 101 (3): 638–652. doi:10.1037/a0024292. PMID 21787094.
   23. ^ Routledge, C.; Wildschut, T.; Sedikides, C.; Juhl, J.; Arndt, J.
       (2012). "The power of the past: Nostalgia as a meaning-making
       resource". Memory. 20 (5): 452–460.
       doi:10.1080/09658211.2012.677452. PMID 22639901. S2CID 15357239.
   24. ^ Baldwin, M.; Landau, M.J. (2014). "Exploring nostalgia's
       influence on psychological growth". Self and Identity. 13 (2):
       162–177. doi:10.1080/15298868.2013.772320. S2CID 6319780.
   25. ^ Hook, D.(2012) "Screened history: Nostalgia as defensive
       formation." Peace and Conflict: Journal of Peace Psychology, Vol
       18(3), Aug, 2012. Special issue: Of Narratives and Nostalgia. pp.
       225–239
   26. ^ Boym, S. (2001). The future of nostalgia. New York, NY: Basic
       Books
   27. ^ John Tierney (July 8, 2013). "What Is Nostalgia Good For? Quite a
       Bit, Research Shows". The New York Times. Retrieved July 9, 2013.
   28. ^ Zhou, Xinyue; Wildschut, Tim; Sedikides, Constantine; Chen,
       Xiaoxi; Vingerhoets, Ad J. J. M. (2012). "Heartwarming memories:
       Nostalgia maintains physiological comfort". Emotion. 12 (4):
       678–684. doi:10.1037/a0027236. PMID 22390713.
   29. ^ Sedikides, C.; Wildschut, T.; Routledge, C.; Arndt, J. (2015).
       "Nostalgia counteracts self-discontinuity and restores
       self-continuity" (PDF). European Journal of Social Psychology. 45
       (1): 52–61. doi:10.1002/ejsp.2073.
   30. ^ Routledge, Clay (October 31, 2017). "Approach With Caution:
       Nostalgia Is a Potent Political Agent". Undark Magazine.
   31. ^ "The Brain and Nostalgia".
   32. ^ Nostalgia industry
   33. ^ William J. Havlena &amp; Susan L. Holak (2015). The Role of Nature in
       the Nostalgic Experience of the Japanese. Springer. Developments in
--
       Sydney, 1962, vol. ii, p. 145
   36. ^ Wisconsin Public Radio, To the Best of Our Knowledge, "Svetlana
       Boym on Nostalgia", 2002 November 3
   37. ^ Depoe, Stephen (1990). "Requiem for Liberalism: The Therapeutic
       and Deliberative Functions of Nostalgic Appeals in Edward Kennedy's
--
       Democratizing Technology. U Pittsburgh Press. ISBN 9780822965527.
   40. ^ (Davis)
   41. ^ Lizardi, R. (2015). Mediated Nostalgia. Maryland: Lexington
       Books.
   42. ^ Niemeyer, K. (2014). Media and Nostalgia. Palgrave Macmillan.
       ISBN 978-1-137-37588-9.
   43. ^ ^a ^b Merchant, A (2013). "Effects of advertising evoked
       vicarious nostalgia in brand heritage". Journal of Business
       Research: 66.
   44. ^ "DoYouRemember.com". DoYouRemember?. DoYouRemember? Inc.
--
   45. ^ "Oceans 11 1960 Version". IMDB.
   46. ^ Barnwell, R Wixel; Collier, Joel; Shanahan, Kevin J (5 April
       2022). "Nostalgia and Forestalgia: Insights, Evaluation, and
       Implications for Advertising and Product Typology". Journal of
       Advertising. 50 (5): 19. doi:10.1080/00913367.2022.2036652.
--
Further reading[edit]

     * Barnwell, R. Wixel, Joel Collier, and Kevin J. Shanahan. "Nostalgia
       and Forestalgia: Insights, Evaluation, and Implications for
       Advertising and Product Typology." Journal of Advertising (2022):
       1-18. [2]
     * Bartholeyns, G. (2014). "The instant past: Nostalgia and digital
       photo retro photography." Media and Nostalgia. Yearning for the
       past, present and future, ed. K. Niemeyer (Palgrave Macmillan):
       51–69.
     *

   Batcho, K. I. (2013). "Nostalgia: Retreat or support in difficult
   times?". The American Journal of Psychology. 126 (3): 355–367.
   doi:10.5406/amerjpsyc.126.3.0355. PMID 24027948.
--
   Vandenhoeck &amp; Ruprecht 2005. Sp. 380–384.

     Niemeyer, Katharina (ed. 2014), Media and Nostalgia. Yearning for the
   past, present and future'(Palgrave Macmillan.

--
   la llengua catalana [Barcelona, Curial Edicions Catalanes, 1983]

     Davis, Fred Yearning for Yesterday: a Sociology of Nostalgia. New
   York: Free Press, 1979.

     Freeman, Lindsey A., Longing for the Bomb: Oak Ridge and Atomic
   Nostalgia. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2015.

     Hofer, Johannes, "Medical Dissertation on Nostalgia." Bulletin of the
   Institute of the History of Medicine. Trans. Carolyn Kiser Anspach 2.6
   ((1688) Aug. 1934): 376–91.
--
   Psychiatry:1535–1860, [Hartsdale, NY, Carlisle Publishing, Inc, 1982]

     Hutcheon, Linda "Irony, Nostalgia, and the Postmodern"

     Jameson, Fredric (1989). "Nostalgia for the Present". The South
   Atlantic Quarterly. 88 (2): 527–60.

--
   Empirical Synthesis." Child Development 69:4 (Aug. 1998): 903–34.

     Dylan Trigg, The Aesthetics of Decay: Nothingness, Nostalgia, and the
   Absence of Reason (New York: Peter Lang, 2006) [3]

--

     Zhou, X.; Sedikides, C.; Wildschut, T.; Gao, D. (2008).
   "Counteracting loneliness: On the restorative function of nostalgia"
   (PDF). Psychological Science. 19 (10): 1023–1029.
   doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02194.x. PMID 19000213. S2CID 45398320.

     Vess, M.; Arndt, J.; Routledge, C.; Sedikides, C.; Wildschut, T.
   (2012). "Nostalgia as a resource for the self". Self and Identity. 11
   (3): 273–284. doi:10.1080/15298868.2010.521452. S2CID 56018071.

     Rieter, O.,
   http://www.barbarus.org/single-post/2015/08/22/Nostalgia-as-a-way-of-cr
   eating-meaning-in-everyday-life

     Routledge, C.; Wildschut, T.; Sedikides, C.; Juhl, J.; Arndt, J.
   (2012). "The power of the past: Nostalgia as a meaning-making
   resource". Memory. 20 (5): 452–460. doi:10.1080/09658211.2012.677452.
   PMID 22639901. S2CID 15357239.

     Routledge, C.; Arndt, J.; Wildschut, T.; Sedikides, C.; Hart, C. M.
   (2011). "The past makes the present meaningful: Nostalgia as an
   existential resource". Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.
   101 (3): 638–652. doi:10.1037/a0024292. PMID 21787094.
--
   ISBN

     Gilad Padva, Queer Nostalgia in Cinema and Pop Culture (Basingstock,
   UK and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014). 254 pp.

   Look up nostalgia in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

   Wikiquote has quotations related to Nostalgia.

     * v
--
     * Mono no aware
     * Neglect
     * Nostalgia
     * Outrage
     * Panic
--

   Retrieved from
   "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nostalgia&amp;oldid=1119774620"

   Categories:
     * Nostalgia
     * Emotions
     * 17th-century neologisms
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-30">
<text>
   Annals of Technology

Why a Great Wave of Nostalgia Is Sweeping Through China

   By Amanda R. Martinez
--
     * Save this story for later.

   Why a Great Wave of Nostalgia Is Sweeping Through China

   At the No. 8 Hot Pot Restaurant in Beijing, a school bell rings at 5:30
--
   twenty-five-year-old diner said that it made her want to cry.

   The classroom restaurant is part of a wave of nostalgia sweeping the
   generation of Chinese born between 1980 and 1989, known in China as
   baling hou, or “post-eighties.” In late 2010, in the eleven days after
--
   a sense of cultural continuity—albeit a variant that favors one’s
   personal experience of the past. But recent psychological research on
   the cognitive function of nostalgia suggests that the cause of this
   wave could be the post-eighties’ contemporary social experience.

   A number of studies have revealed that when we suffer from certain
   psychological ailments—loneliness, social isolation, self-doubt,
   negative mood, and the feeling that life is meaningless—nostalgia can
   act as a coping mechanism. Such ailments can cause the mind to sift
   through its cache of memories, summoning up those with a particular
--
   one of redemption: at first, conditions may have seemed grim or
   hopeless, but eventually things were resolved in a favorable ending.
   Through nostalgia, the researchers claimed, we bring back to the
   surface evidence of past triumphs and close relationships, times when
   our lives felt safe and ordered. Clay Routledge, a psychologist and
   nostalgia researcher at North Dakota State University, explained,
   “You’re affirming the self—’I’ve done great things’—which is presumably
   predictive of the future. ‘I might be uncertain right now, but just
--
   ”

   To illuminate nostalgia’s role as an emotional buffer, Routledge and
   other researchers attempted to destabilize their subjects’ sense of
   self. Participants took tests that could be collectively characterized
--
   non-nostalgic counterparts.

   That nostalgia could be a source of mental resilience and motivation
   directly challenges certain critics’ notion of the sentiment as
   paralyzing, a harbinger of cultural stagnation. “It’s exactly the
   opposite,” Constantine Sedikides, a psychologist and nostalgia expert
   at the University of Southampton, said. “When you become nostalgic, you
   don’t become past-oriented. You want to go out there and do things.”

   If there is a poster population for nostalgia’s self-regulatory
   effects, it is China’s post-eighties cohort. As the nation’s first
   generation of only children—China instituted its one-child policy in
--
   that supplies Shanghai’s water, and the discovery that the country’s
   bottled water may be as bad or worse than its tap water), and the
   resulting stress presents an onslaught of nostalgia’s known
   psychological triggers. Xinyue Zhou, a psychologist at Sun Yat-sen
   University, in Guangzhou, whose research has demonstrated nostalgia’s
   ability to bolster a sense of social connectedness among a diverse
   cross-section of Chinese citizens, said, “The uncertainty, the lack of
--
   temporary relief within a safe moment of the past, they are also
   relevant to the post-eighties’ present reality and their hope for the
   future—a detail that underscores researchers’ findings that nostalgia
   can mitigate psychological slights and promote optimism.

--
   generation to come of age in a China with global consumerism, popular
   culture, and technology, have, by far, the most universal cultural
   references through which to express their nostalgia. An emblematic
   example is the generation’s rekindled obsession with Transformers, a
   toy line and cartoon, introduced in 1984, about robots that morph into
--

   Amanda R. Martinez, a science journalist and playwright, is writing a
   book on the global phenomenon of nostalgia.

   Photograph by CQSB/ChinaFotoPress/Getty

   More:ElementsNostalgiatechpages

The Daily
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-31">
<text>
   - China Marketing Club BlogCAREERSContact Us

Chinese Consumer Trends: Nostalgia’s Role in Consumerism

   Have you ever listened to music you haven’t heard for a long time and
--
   wanted but couldn’t get when you were a child? Were there any anime or
   shows that you loved watching during your childhood? Ahhh...memories..
   Nostalgia marketing is so successful because brands can quickly and
   deeply connect with audiences by revisiting pleasant memories. Research
   shows that the brain’s feel-good chemicals, dopamine, serotonin, and
--
   In our previous article and Instagram carousel, we already analyzed why
   Gen Z is a lucrative customer segment with the highest potential in
   China. Nostalgia marketing commonly targets millennials and Gen Zers,
   as they are now in the workforce of “Workism” societies saturated with
   highly educated and skilled workers. Although most of them are
--
   they have become culturally and socially relevant to most of us. Yet,
   is the endorsement of Gary Vee the direct causation of the white-hot
   card mania? Or do most of us have the desire for nostalgia deep inside
   our hearts?
   SportsCards_LinkedIn_3-700x700.png SportsCards_LinkedIn_3-700x700.png
   PastedGraphic-12.png PastedGraphic-12.png

   Nostalgia marketing is undeniably powerful. Burger King switched its
   logo to the brand used in the 90s this year.  People who are nostalgic
   tend to remember the good times and the personal meaning attached to
--
   had.

   In China, Nostalgia marketing is also extremely effective on
   millennials and Gen Zers. The Chinese value collectivism, so as a
   culture, they tend to share collective memories and develop collective
--
   childhood memories.

   Now, we know nostalgia plays a crucial role in consumer behavior. Are
   you ready to tug at your audiences’ nostalgic heartstrings and take
   your brand to the next level? Send us an email at
--
   Instagram Marketing, Influencer Marketing, Little Red Book, Marketing
   Strategy, Online Marketing, Social Commerce, Social Media Marketing,
   Tiktok Marketing, Video MarketingGuest UserNovember 5, 2021nostalgia,
   nostalgia marketing, pokemon, logan paul, floyd mayweather,
   pokemoncards, charizard, Burger King, Gary Vee, NFT, Chinese Consumers,
   Chinese luxury market, China Retail Sales, Chinese economy, Chinese
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-32">
<text>

</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-33">
<text>
   Quick Navigation

   Nostalgia is a powerful feeling. It provides us with a sense of
   happiness and sentimental longing when we think about a fond memory
   from our past. Often when we reflect on old memories it can boost our
   mood and reduce stress. It has been shown that feelings of nostalgia
   can also help people feel valued, loved and enhances perceptions of
   social support when people are feeling lonely.
--
   musical or even just a popular song during your school years.

   "Music evokes so many feelings in us, memories, nostalgia, things that
   are connected to our past"

--
   Music can reconnect us to a special moment in time - you may find
   yourself sinking into beloved memories and feeling 18 all over again!
   Many studies have shown that nostalgia can be used as a mood elevating
   technique; increasing levels of happiness and strengthening social
   bonds. A fun way to start a wave of nostalgia is by creating a playlist
   for life on Storii. Gather all of your old favourite songs that revive
   fond memories and categorise them on your Storii account. You also have
--
Look at Old Photographs

   Looking at old photos is another way to spark feelings of nostalgia.
   Photographs can often evoke emotions and allow you to relive your
   favourite moments. Retronaut is a great resource to find old historic
--
   Dancing and of course the Disney classics. Watching a movie from your
   childhood or even seeing an old TV commercial can certainly spark that
   feeling of nostalgia. The BBC's archive of TV nostalgia has some great
   TV programmes for you to have a look at for free that will certainly
   take you back.
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-34">
<text>
   (BUTTON)

The Benefits of Nostalgia

   Medically reviewed by Scientific Advisory Board — By John DiPrete on
   September 16, 2018

   If unpleasant or obsessional, past memories can hurt — but nostalgia is
   good for you. The benefits of this internal psychological state are
   touted in various academic studies exploring the art and practice of
--
   lend a gratifying sense of continuity in our lives.

   Nostalgia can take on many different forms. Watching an old
   black-and-white movie can trigger a cultural nostalgia for a lost
   period in time. Often that longing can predate one’s own date of birth:
   fondness for a time only your parents may have known and talked about.
--
   The mental journey back through time adds a fourth dimension to the
   present. If mindfulness is the focal point of the Eternal Now,
   nostalgia forms a special continuum to the timeless past, expanding our
   concept of the self. The future may be vague, inchoate and
   unpredictable; but the past represents a finished whole that cannot be
   harmed or tampered with.

   Documented reasons why nostalgia (when used intelligently) can be good
   for us:

--
   as telling stories and sharing wisdom from a bygone time.

   According to Dena Kemmet, “an additional function of nostalgia may be
   its motivating potential. Nostalgia may boost optimism, spark
   inspiration, and foster creativity.”

   According to Dr. Clay Routledge, Social Psychologist and Associate
   Professor of Psychology at North Dakota State University,nostalgia
   “increases positive mood, self-esteem, feelings of social
   connectedness, optimism about the future, and perceptions of meaning in
   life. Furthermore, nostalgia motivates people to focus on cultivating
   meaningful relationships and pursue important life goals. In addition,
   as people get older, nostalgia makes them feel youthful and energetic.
   Nostalgia also reduces existential fears about death.”

   The emotion of nostalgia can be evoked from a familiar scent, an old
   photograph, or a cherished song. Often it occurs during periods of
   sadness or transition, but it can appear anytime — affecting the young
--
   and more adaptable to life‘s vicissitudes.

   The healthy use of nostalgia is not about retreating into the past. On
   the contrary, exploring the treasures of our “mental” time capsules can
   propel us toward the future, with a restored sense of enthusiasm and
--
   correlated with increased resilience and self-confidence.

   For some, nostalgia can come to resemble a spiritual meditation.
   Indeed, the past is more venerated in places where the future is more
   fleeting — where constant change is often expected and demanded. The
--
   turmoil.

   The judicious use of nostalgia offers each one of us who feels stranded
   in the present an anchor to the past.
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-35">
<text>
   Collaboration and teams

The Surprising Power of Nostalgia at Work

   It can deepen relationships, foster creativity, and boost a collective
--
   Summary.

   Nostalgia is an important psychological resource that helps individuals
   cope with life’s stressors, build strong relationships, find and
   maintain meaning in life, and become more creative and inspired. By
   understanding how nostalgia works, managers can utilize its power to
   help their organizations thrive. The author presents three reasons to
   do so. First, it brings the social self online by increasing social
--
   strengthening social and group bonds. Second, it can reduce turnover by
   helping work feel meaningful — especially for employees who are burned
   out. Third, because nostalgia makes people feel socially supported,
   energized, and confident, it can help employees feel more creative and
   inspired.
--
   Ler em português

   Many people assume that nostalgia is purely entertainment, a feeling
   individuals enjoy because it takes them back to the more carefree days
   of their youth. Some view it as maladaptive fixation on the past,
   perhaps indicating a fear of change. I’ve heard business analysts and
   leaders argue that, although nostalgia may help some companies sell
   consumers a range of products, it’s ultimately bad for business and the
   economy. They imagine that by keeping people focused on the past,
   nostalgia undermines innovation, creativity, and ultimately progress.

   From that perspective, there’s little reason for managers to view
   nostalgia as having value within their organizations. However, a
   growing body of research reveals that it’s an important psychological
   resource that helps individuals cope with life’s stressors, build
   strong relationships, find and maintain meaning in life, and become
   more creative and inspired. I’ve been conducting research on the
   psychology of nostalgia for almost 20 years. Based on what I’ve
   learned, I believe managers can use the power of nostalgia to help
   their organizations thrive.

Nostalgia Is a Psychological Resource

   First, managers need to understand how nostalgia actually works. When
   people engage in nostalgia, they’re accessing personally meaningful
   autobiographical events typically shared with family, friends, and
   other close connections. It isn’t just a happy trip down memory lane —
--
   in which negative feelings such as longing and loss give way to
   positive feelings such as happiness, social connectedness, gratitude,
   and hope. In other words, nostalgia is bittersweet, but more sweet than
   bitter.

   Nostalgia can be triggered by explicit reminders of the past, such as
   running into an old friend or hearing music from one’s youth, but
   people also often become nostalgic when they’re feeling down or
   distressed in some way. Common psychological triggers of nostalgia
   include feelings of sadness, loneliness, meaninglessness, uncertainty,
   and boredom.

   These negative psychological states increase nostalgia because
   nostalgia is restorative. After conducting dozens of studies using
   diverse methods ranging from qualitative text analysis, self-report
   surveys, and behavioral and neuroscientific experiments, my colleagues
   and I have concluded that nostalgia is best described as a
   self-regulatory existential resource that people naturally and
   frequently use to navigate stress and uncertainty and find the
   motivation needed to move forward with purpose and focus. The impact of
   nostalgia on meaning is particularly important because meaning in life
   has great motivational power. Research finds that nostalgia motivates
   the pursuit of important life goals by increasing that sense of
   meaning.
--
   Humans are an existential species. To flourish, we need to make
   meaningful social connections and feel like we’re contributing to the
   world in a way that matters. Nostalgia serves these existential
   endeavors. Here are three reasons for managers to bring this adaptive
   feature of human psychology into their organizations — and ways to do
   it.

1. Nostalgia can help build strong relationships and teams

   Social bonds are a central feature of nostalgia. Most nostalgic
   memories involve other people, and when individuals reflect on these
   memories, they feel more socially connected and supported. Managers can
   take advantage of nostalgia’s social nature to promote strong
   relationships and teams. Encouraging employees to share nostalgic
   stories with team members may help them build deeper connections
   because nostalgia orients people toward social goals. For example, in
   one set of studies my colleagues and I conducted, we found that having
   research participants spend a few minutes reflecting on a nostalgic
--

   We also observed that when people are experiencing higher levels of
   nostalgia, they’re more interested in working on tasks with others, and
   nostalgia has been shown to increase empathy for others and prosocial
   behavior in the forms of volunteering and charitable donations.
   Research also finds that, when people are part of a group, nostalgia
   for an event shared within it makes people more committed to the group.

   Nostalgia brings the social self online. It increases social agency and
   directs that agency toward helping others and strengthening social and
   group bonds. Given the importance of positive relationships and
   effective teams for both the health of individual employees and the
   organization, managers should explore ways to incorporate nostalgia
   into team-building activities, as well as social events like workplace
   celebrations and retreats. For example, create a retro music playlist
   by asking employees to submit nostalgia-themed song requests. This will
   give employees of different ages and with different experiences the
   opportunity to revisit their own nostalgic memories, which energizes
   the desire to connect with others. It will also inspire them to share
   these memories with others, which helps build deeper connections and
   increase nostalgia in others. Indeed, research finds that exposure to
   other people’s nostalgic memories increases one’s own nostalgia and all
   the associated psychological benefits — in other words, nostalgia is
   contagious.

2. Nostalgia can help make work feel meaningful and reduce turnover

   As an existential resource, nostalgia helps people maintain and enhance
   meaning in the present — when they reflect on past meaningful
   experiences, they become motivated to prioritize meaning in the
--
   those experiencing burnout. A series of studies found that when workers
   were prompted to reflect on experiences within their organization that
   made them nostalgic (organizational nostalgia), they subsequently
   reported a greater sense of meaning at work and lower turnover
   intentions. These effects were most pronounced among employees
--
   which can provide guidance for how to restore meaning at work in the
   present. Developing organizational social rituals and traditions can
   help create organizational nostalgia in the first place — it’s an
   investment in the future. For example, organizations could hold monthly
   game nights, potluck dinners, movie screenings, book clubs, or other
--
   organization is undergoing major changes that cause anxiety,
   interpersonal conflict, or other negative experiences, organizational
   nostalgia may prove to be a vital resource.

3. Nostalgia can help organizations be more creative and inspired

   Managers looking to cultivate outside-the-box thinking can also take
   advantage of nostalgia. A workplace that encourages employees to both
   share nostalgic memories and make new ones with their coworkers primes
   the pump of creativity. People are more likely to feel comfortable
   taking risks and exploring new ideas when they feel socially supported,
   energized, and confident. Nostalgia generates these states and can thus
   offer a way to orient employees toward creative thinking and
   problem-solving.
--
   open-minded and creative, and critically, made them produce more
   creative content (as judged by independent evaluators). In addition,
   our research shows that nostalgia makes people feel more inspired.

   While on the subject of creativity, it’s worth noting that there is no
   single right way of inducing nostalgia. Our studies as well as those
   conducted by other research teams have utilized diverse nostalgia
   prompts, such as having people write about a nostalgic memory, read
   accounts of other people’s nostalgic memories, read song lyrics that
   make them nostalgic, listen to nostalgic music, watch nostalgic music
   videos, look at old photographs, visit nostalgia-themed websites,
   create scrapbooks, and engage in activities using augmented reality
   technology.

   Managers should look for opportunities to introduce nostalgia in ways
   they believe will best fit their organizational environment and
   culture. What’s most important is that managers appreciate that
   meaningfully connecting the present to the past via nostalgia can help
   them and their employees have the mindset and motivation needed to
   productively work toward future-oriented individual and organizational
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-36">
<text>
   #Thriveworks » Restorative vs. reflective nostalgia: Learn to spot the
   differences and combat memory distortions Comments Feed alternate
   alternate alternate
--
   [home-icon.png] Learn Coping Skills, Mental Health Topics

Restorative vs. reflective nostalgia: Learn to spot the differences and
combat memory distortions

--
   [gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==]
   [arrow-down.png]
     * Nostalgia is a familiar feeling, but there are actually two
       different types—reflective and restorative nostalgia.
     * Restorative nostalgia involves happy memories and associations with
       the past. When we feel restoratively nostalgic, we’re likely to
       feel motivated to seek out new and rewarding experiences.
     * Conversely, reflective nostalgia may often make us feel gloomy and
       disappointed, making it seem that the present moment doesn’t
       compare with our memories, preventing us from moving forward and
       making new positive experiences.
     * Though they might sound like polar opposites, both types of
       nostalgia can be empowering experiences, if we learn to harness
       their emotional power.
     * Feeling reflectively nostalgic can be counteracted by remembering
--
   days gone by has a bittersweet quality, one that can be difficult to
   express. We’ve all felt nostalgic, but we may not be as familiar with
   the two types of nostalgia: restorative and reflective. While
   restorative nostalgia makes us feel positive about our past and
   motivates us to seek out new possibilities and experiences, reflective
   nostalgia often leaves us upset and wistful, thinking that our best
   days are behind us.

--
   that our brains are rewarding or even bribing us into seeking out
   positive experiences in order to keep the good vibes flowing. In
   contrast, feelings of reflective nostalgia cause us to shut ourselves
   off to new possibilities; in this state of mind, we might actually be
   susceptible to developing depression or anxiety. Despite the
   drastically different ways that restorative and reflective nostalgia
   affect us, psychologists now know that our ability to recall past
   events isn’t very accurate. Most memories, good or bad (and especially
--
   white-and-green-wooden-house-miniature

Reflective vs. Restorative Nostalgia

   Reflective nostalgia was first described in the 17th century when Swiss
   physician Dr. Johannes Hofer noted that soldiers who were stationed
   abroad would often long for their home country, experiencing a
--
   effect of their memories could not be mistaken.

   When the past is viewed through the lens of reflective nostalgia, we’re
   typically closed off to the possibility of change and are reflecting
   back on old memories in order to seek refuge. We don’t see potential in
--

   Regardless of whether you’re experiencing reflective or restorative
   nostalgia, it’s important to recognize and harness the emotional power
   of these unique psychological experiences. You can clear the haze
   associated with memory distortions from your train of thought by taking
--
       encounter at least some resistance in our efforts.

   Unlike restorative nostalgia, sensations of reflective nostalgia aren’t
   pleasant. Evaluate whether your negative emotions could be attached to
   an underlying mental health condition. Reflecting too long on adversity
--
How to Harness Restorative Nostalgic Memories

   When you feel the rush of restorative nostalgia, try to:
     * Soak it all in, but don’t dwell in the past for too long. If you’re
       thinking about lost friends, an old relationship, or a breakthrough
--
     Mental Health Topics

     Restorative vs. reflective nostalgia: Learn to spot the differences
   and combat memory distortions
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-37">
<text>
   Technology

How the Internet Uses Nostalgia

   Long-lost memories pop up in music recommendations, personality
--
   House are selling Greek yogurt. Boyz II Men recently made a cameo on
   How I Met Your Mother. This year's Super Bowl featured, of all people,
   Flea. We are having a moment of '90s nostalgia, occasioned in part by
   millennials (or The Youths or Those Kids or whatever you want to call
   them) who are aging into adulthood and therefore eager to relive their
--
   ***

   Nostalgia, the copious literature on it suggests, comes in two basic
   forms. One is organic, the kind that washes over you when you see an
   old picture of yourself and your cousins, aged 7 and 9 and 10, giggling
--
   Dawson’s Creek's Joey and/or Blossom's Joey, appropriated to arouse a
   vague sense that we have lost something as we’ve moved, inexorably,
   into our future. This form of nostalgia is usually invoked, in one way
   or another, to sell us stuff. You could, because of that, dismiss its
   validity (fauxstalgia?). But it will live on, inevitably, because media
   producers know exactly what advertisers have long understood: that
   nostalgia, like sex, sells.

   The products of that basic insight, whether they're movies or TV shows
--
   Lebowski.

   Nostalgia, under the stewardship of the Internet, has been made nimble.

   As market goods, however, these products can also be recursive: Mad Men
--

   While, sure, commercial culture is commercial, it’s also notable how
   ambient nostalgia has become. The memorial-industrial complex ensures
   that our past—our collective past—permeates our present. That complex
   markets directly to memories that are shared, across generations and
--
   to realize the vague-but-also-urgent goal shared by many social
   networks and services: user engagement. "For almost everyone,” Sung
   says, a nostalgia-focused Spotify story “usually triggers some sort of
   strong emotion. Sometimes it's, 'Wow, I totally forgot that song.
   Thanks so much for reminding me of it.' Other times, it's more like,
--
   Either way, though: engagement. And an experience of the past that is
   customized—if not to a person, individually, then to that person's
   generational demographic. Spotify’s interpretation of nostalgia, in
   that sense, is pretty much the opposite of The LEGO® Movie’s or Mad
   Men's or that of Kraft-by-way-of-the-Ninja Turtles-by-way-of-Vanilla
--
                                     ***

   Spotify isn’t alone in its use of nostalgia as a marketing tool. Social
   networks in general, you could argue, are
   implicitly—preemptively—nostalgic, combining our pasts and our
--

   Networks, however, are also experimenting with more explicit forms of
   nostalgia-baiting. Earlier this month, Facebook rolled out “Look Back”
   compilations that collect users’ most-liked photos, statuses, and life
   events into an easily viewable video. (These collections come in
--

   Even Pinterest, which is most commonly associated with future-oriented
   and aspirational image-collecting, makes use of customized nostalgia.
   Gabriel Trionfi, Pinterest's user experience researcher, is a
   psychologist by training, and he points out that the flip side of
   anticipation—one of the emotions Pinterest uses to generation its own
   version of user engagement—is, yep, nostalgia.

   Journalists have long recognized the same thing advertisers have, which
   is that nostalgia is an extremely efficient tool for selling stuff.

   “Nostalgia is a known way to boost people's mood,” Trionfi told me. It
   allows people to live (and re-live) “something familiar, something they
   remember, a positive emotional experience.” On Pinterest, he points
--
   past.

   Nostalgia, at its most basic level, requires access to memories—and
   there is, of course, no better archive than the Internet. The social
   networks that are becoming increasingly synonymous with our experience
--

   The good feeling is growing. Many media outlets ("content producers,"
   you could call them) are selling nostalgia in one form or another:
   There’s Retronaut and @historyinpix and the many similar—and
   controversial—features dedicated to the resurfacing of the past.
   There’s New York magazine’s late, great “Nostalgia Face-Check” series.
   Yesterday, Wired—known mostly for its reporting on the future—published
   a list, curated by Questlove, of the top hip-hop tracks of the ’90s.
--

   This is all fairly unremarkable; journalists have long recognized the
   same thing advertisers have, which is that nostalgia is an extremely
   efficient tool for selling stuff. But media outlets—especially the ones
   that are merging technological prowess with journalistic—aren’t just
   leveraging our soft enthusiasms for the past; they’re also taking a
   platform-focused approach to that work. They, like the social networks,
   are trafficking in targeted nostalgia.

   Take Buzzfeed’s ever-more-ubiquitous quizzes. “Which ‘90s Movie
--
   people who fit those demographics.

   The upshot of all this? Nostalgia no longer comes in one-size-fits-all,
   and that size is no longer “large.” Nostalgia, under the stewardship of
   the Internet, has been made nimble. Our tenuous relationship with the
   past can now be customized and made relevant, in the manner of a
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-38">
<text>
   >gt; Television >gt; Sponsored Content

The creative rise of Internet nostalgia

   As the early days of the Internet begin to inform creative practices,
--
   But is it all too soon?

   A sped up sense of nostalgia

   As artists explore the tumultuous history of the digital and create
--
   rise and fall, versions are superseded in mere heartbeats and
   universally adopted programs can disappear after just a few months.
    According to Kostreva a true sense of nostalgia can build up around
   this fast turn around of programs and systems. ‘I think/hope that there
   is always a certain level of sincerity to it, considering that most of
--
   height of our interest, when it “was still good.” Those are the
   memories that become romanticised and sentimental. The cycle of
   generating nostalgia mirrors the life-span of these online entities.’

   An extra sense of loss stems from the common user belief that the
--
   old technologies able to inform upon modern practice.

   ‘I don’t think it is nostalgia alone that is driving this love of old
   technology. I might have fond memories of Super Mario Kart but that
   doesn’t mean it’s not still awesome.’
--
   aesthetic response.

   ‘Nostalgia is really about the feeling the memories give you so I find
   it’s most successful when artists try and capture that feeling in the
   style of their work. Personally when I see Internet nostalgia used as
   subject matter I find the work to be flat and uninteresting. Nostalgia
   goes against critical thinking, it glorifies.’

--
   Yet some artworks seem to be both sincere and ironic at the same time.
   While this initially seems impossible, the sped up conditions in which
   Internet nostalgia emerged has helped to make this an actuality.

   According to Schreier, ‘As the rate of technological development
--

   By existing within this digital culture a swinging oscillation between
   hope and despair is intuitively assumed. Internet nostalgia relates to
   this by highlighting a recent past that is now obsolete through swift
   technological advancement.

   ‘Given the frustrations of current times, there is a very palpable
   sense of nostalgia for the unfulfilled promises of past utopian
   visions. In revisiting these moments, as we oscillate between former
   and future visions, there is perhaps a hope that we might come to
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-39">
<text>

   Trump and Biden could not be more different in terms of ideology. But
   when it comes to nostalgia, both candidates relied on a similar notion
   of returning America to a different time.

--
   Melania Trump leave. (AP Photo/Evan Vucci)

   Biden also has a brand of nostalgia and has played on the trope of an
   industrial America of yesteryear, where people work hard, love their
   families as they do their neighbours. It’s a place where “honest Joe”
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-3">
<text>
   Menu
   Verywell Mind
   What Is Nostalgia?
     * Mental Health A-Z
          + Addiction
--
   Mental Health A-Z

What Is Nostalgia?

   By
--
   View All
   Table of Contents
     * What Is Nostalgia?
     * History
     * Examples
--
     * How to Avoid the Negative Effects

What Is Nostalgia?

Nostalgia

   Nostalgia is a sentimentality for the past, typically for a period or
   place with happy personal associations. Nostalgia is usually triggered
   by something reminding an individual of an experience from the past. It
   is often characterized as a longing or desire to return to a former
   time or place.

   Nostalgia can also be thought of as "the memory of happiness," as it is
   often associated with happy memories from the past. It can be a source
   of comfort in times of sadness or distress.

   However, nostalgia is not just about happy memories; it can also be
   about longing for a time when things were simpler, or for a time when
   we felt more connected to others.

History of Nostalgia

   Nostalgia is a relatively new concept. The word was first coined in
   1688 by Swiss physician Johannes Hofer, who defined it as a
   neurological illness of continually thinking about one's homeland and
   longing for return.

   It was not until the 19th century that nostalgia began to be seen as a
   positive sentiment, rather than a pathological condition. Swiss
   psychiatrist Carl Jung, for example, saw nostalgia as a way of
   reconnecting with our past and understanding our present. For Jung,
   nostalgia was a way to access the "collective unconscious"—the shared
   history and experiences that we all have as human beings.

   During the First World War, nostalgia was once again associated with
   illness, as soldiers away at battle longed for the comforts of home.
   However, after the war ended, nostalgia once again became a positive
   sentiment.

Examples of Nostalgia From Popular Culture

   There are many examples of nostalgia in popular culture. The film It's
   a Wonderful Life (1946) is often cited as one of the most nostalgic
   films ever made. The film tells the story of George Bailey (played by
--

   The television series The Wonder Years (1988-1993) is another example
   of nostalgia. The show tells the story of Kevin Arnold (played by Fred
   Savage), a boy growing up in the suburbs in the 1960s and 1970s. The
   show is notable for its use of voice-over narration from Kevin's older
--
   to make it one of the most popular love songs of all time.

Types of Nostalgia

   There are two types of nostalgia: positive and negative.
     * Positive nostalgia is characterized by happy, rose-tinted memories
       of the past. It is often associated with feelings of warmth,
       happiness, and comfort.
     * Negative nostalgia, on the other hand, is characterized by
       bittersweet or even painful memories of the past.It is often
       associated with longing, sadness, and regret.

   Nostalgia can also be divided into three different categories:
   personal, social, and cultural.
     * Personal nostalgia is characterized by memories of specific people
       or events from one's own life.
     * Social nostalgia is characterized by memories of a time when one
       felt more connected to others.
     * Cultural nostalgia is characterized by memories of a time when one
       felt more connected to their culture.

Benefits of Nostalgia

   Nostalgia has been shown to have a number of benefits. For example,
   nostalgia has been shown to:
     * Boost mood
     * Increase self-esteem
--
       divorce, retirement, and death

   Nostalgia can also have positive effects on physical health. For
   example, nostalgia has been shown to boost immune function and reduce
   stress levels.Nostalgia can also help to increase life satisfaction and
   reduce anxiety.

Negative Effects of Nostalgia

   However, nostalgia can also have negative effects. For example,
   nostalgia can:
     * Lead to a sense of loneliness and isolation
     * Cause people to dwell on the past and become unhappy with the
--
   'I Hate Life': What to Do If Nothing Makes You Happy

How to Avoid the Negative Effects of Nostalgia

   There are a few things you can do to avoid the negative effects of
   nostalgia:
     * Think about the present moment. What are you doing right now that
       you enjoy?
--
A Word From Verywell

   Nostalgia is a complex emotion that can have both positive and negative
   effects. If you find yourself feeling nostalgic, try to focus on the
   present moment and the people you care about. If nostalgia is causing
   you distress, it may be helpful to talk to a therapist.
   13 Sources
--
   process to learn more about how we fact-check and keep our content
   accurate, reliable, and trustworthy.
    1. The Atlantic. When Nostalgia Was a Disease.
    2. Battesti M. Nostalgia in the Army (17th-19th Centuries). Front
       Neurol Neurosci. 2016;38:132-142. doi:10.1159/000442652
    3. Batcho KI. Nostalgia: The bittersweet history of a psychological
       concept. Hist Psychol. 2013;16(3):165-176. doi:10.1037/a0032427
    4. National Endowment for the Arts. Did You Know.... It's a Wonderful
--
       1992
    7. Abeyta AA, Routledge C, Kaslon S. Combating Loneliness With
       Nostalgia: Nostalgic Feelings Attenuate Negative Thoughts and
       Motivations Associated With Loneliness. Front Psychol.
       2020;11:1219. Published 2020 Jun 23. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01219
    8. Newman DB, Sachs ME. The Negative Interactive Effects of Nostalgia
       and Loneliness on Affect in Daily Life. Front Psychol.
       2020;11:2185. Published 2020 Sep 2. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2020.02185
    9. Jiang T, Cheung WY, Wildschut T, Sedikides C. Nostalgia,
       reflection, brooding: Psychological benefits and autobiographical
       memory functions. Conscious Cogn. 2021;90:103107.
       doi:10.1016/j.concog.2021.103107
   10. Ismail S, Christopher G, Dodd E, et al. Psychological and Mnemonic
       Benefits of Nostalgia for People with Dementia. J Alzheimers Dis.
       2018;65(4):1327-1344. doi:10.3233/JAD-180075
   11. Juhl J, Wildschut T, Sedikides C, Xiong X, Zhou X. Nostalgia
       promotes help seeking by fostering social connectedness. Emotion.
       2021;21(3):631-643. doi:10.1037/emo0000720
   12. Batcho KI. Nostalgia: retreat or support in difficult times?. Am J
       Psychol. 2013;126(3):355-367. doi:10.5406/amerjpsyc.126.3.0355
   13. Newman DB, Sachs ME, Stone AA, Schwarz N. Nostalgia and well-being
       in daily life: An ecological validity perspective. J Pers Soc
       Psychol. 2020;118(2):325-347. doi:10.1037/pspp0000236
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-40">
<text>
     *
          + Abstract
          + The Sociality of Nostalgia
          + National Nostalgia vs. Personal Nostalgia
          + National Nostalgia and Outgroup Threat
          + National Nostalgia and Outgroup Perceptions in the Context of
            Political Messaging
          + The Current Study
--
   https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.555667

Making America Great Again? National Nostalgia's Effect on Outgroup
Perceptions

--
       Richmond, VA, United States

   Nostalgia is a fond longing for the past that has been shown to
   increase feelings of meaning, social connectedness, and
   self-continuity. Although nostalgia for personal memories provides
   intra- and interpersonal benefits, there may be negative consequences
   of group-based nostalgia on the perception and acceptance of others.
   The presented research examined national nostalgia (a form of
   collective nostalgia), and its effects on group identification and
   political attitudes in the United States. In a sample of US voters (N =
   252), tendencies to feel personal and national nostalgia are associated
   with markedly different emotional and attitudinal profiles. Higher
   levels of national nostalgia predicted both positive attitudes toward
   President Trump and racial prejudice, though there was no evidence of
   such relationships with personal nostalgia. National nostalgia most
   strongly predicted positive attitudes toward president Trump among
   those high in racial prejudice. Furthermore, nostalgia's positive
   relationship with racial prejudice was partially mediated by perceived
   outgroup threat. Results from this study will help us better understand
   how the experience of national nostalgia can influence attitudes and
   motivate political behavior.

--
   rhetoric (Skelley, 2017). One concept repeatedly emerged within these
   discussions as a mainstay of Trump's political appeal: that of
   nostalgia, broadly defined as a bittersweet longing for the past.
   Evidence of Trump's appeals to an earlier time in American history have
   been cited from the beginning of the 2016 presidential campaign through
--
   voters' latent feelings of threat to their economic welfare, or to the
   racial or cultural homogeneity of American culture (Brownstein, 2016;
   Smeekes et al., 2020). On a broad scale, nostalgia focused on
   nationality is a prominent feature of right-wing populist party
   rhetoric, and evidence from voters in the Netherlands suggests that the
   emphasis of stigmatizing outgroups and preserving cultural hegemony
   within nostalgic messaging is what explains the link between nostalgia
   and right-wing populist support (Smeekes et al., 2020). In the United
   States, several studies provide strong evidence of a link between
--
   has of yet established whether Trump's nostalgic rhetoric may be
   associated with voters' attitudes toward racial outgroups. To this end,
   in this paper, we present evidence that national nostalgia, an emotion
   distinct from personal nostalgia, is associated with increased
   prejudice as well as support for the populist messaging of Donald
   Trump.

The Sociality of Nostalgia

   Nostalgia is a mostly positive emotion that increases self-regard,
   attenuates self-esteem defense, enhances meaning in life, increases
   perceptions of self-continuity, and lessens feelings of existential
   threat (Wildschut et al., 2006; Routledge et al., 2008). Most people
   report experiencing nostalgia on a regular basis (Wildschut et al.,
   2006) and often structure their present in anticipation of experiencing
   nostalgia in the future (Cheung et al., 2020). Nostalgia is triggered
   in various ways, including by music, scents, and reflecting on past
   momentous events (Barrett et al., 2010; Reid et al., 2015; Sedikides et
--
   et al., 2008).

   The social connectedness function of nostalgia is a primary avenue
   through which nostalgia confers positive psychological benefits.
   Although nostalgic memories are more likely to be evoked while
   experiencing negative affect (Wildschut et al., 2006) and loneliness
--
   memories seem to indirectly regulate these positive emotions by evoking
   and making more salient one's symbolic connections with others
   (Sedikides and Wildschut, 2019). For example, nostalgia felt in
   response to loneliness has been shown to reduce perceptions of
   isolation and low social support (Zhou et al., 2008). In organizational
--
   et al., 2015).

   Importantly, those who are more likely to experience nostalgia (i.e.,
   those high in personal nostalgia) are also more motivated to control
   prejudicial feelings and reduce their expression of prejudices against
   outgroups as a result of these positive benefits (Cheung et al., 2017).
   Four studies of Caucasian Americans examined the links between personal
   nostalgia and the expression of both blatant and more subtle prejudice
   toward African Americans (Cheung et al., 2017). They found that the
   link between personal nostalgia and prejudice reduction was mediated by
   feelings of empathy, suggesting that the experience of nostalgia offers
   advantages beyond the self.

National Nostalgia vs. Personal Nostalgia

   The link between nostalgia and sociality becomes more complex when
   considering nostalgia felt for one's group. Although nostalgia felt at
   the individual level confers both intra- and interpersonal benefits,
   group-based nostalgia appears to have a distinct psychological profile
   from personal nostalgia. Group-based emotions, as distinct from
   individual-level emotions, arise when individuals self-categorize with
   a social group and integrate the group into their sense of self (Seger
--
   Mastro, 2015).

   Group-based nostalgia—operationalized as nostalgia felt for events
   shared with one's ingroup, or collective nostalgia—can be experienced
   in a variety of social settings, including organizations, school
   classes (e.g., Class of 2021), cities, and nations (Wildschut et al.,
   2014; Smeekes, 2015; Green et al., 2021). Like individual-level
   nostalgia, shared memories can include notable events, such as a
   special performance (band or orchestra), graduation day, homecoming
   (college class), or sports championships (city). However, unlike
   individual-level nostalgia, group-based nostalgia can occur in the form
   of a longing for a past that individuals themselves did not experience,
   but rather one that was passed down through collective memory
   (Martinovic et al., 2017). Additionally, collective nostalgia has been
   shown to increase positive attitudes as well as an approach-oriented
   action tendency toward the ingroup relative to an individually
   experienced nostalgic memory (Wildschut et al., 2014, Study 1).
   Collective nostalgia also can increase group-oriented prosociality
   (e.g., willingness to volunteer or donate money to help the ingroup;
   Wildschut et al., 2014; Green et al., 2021). Collective self-esteem
--
   collective self-esteem, which, in turn, increased intentions to
   volunteer. Other research has found additional ingroup benefits to
   collective nostalgia, such a preference for domestic (vs. foreign)
   consumer products (Dimitriadou et al., 2019) and a promotion of
   collective political action (in Hong Kong; Cheung et al., 2017).
--
   an ordinary collective memory) were more willing to punish outgroup
   members who were unfair to an ingroup member (Wildschut et al., 2014,
   Study 3). However, in some cases, collective nostalgia might increase
   intergroup contact when individuals can feel collective nostalgia for a
   superordinate group (Martinovic et al., 2017). In a study of former
   Yugoslavians who had settled in Australia, Bosniaks, Croats, and Serbs
--
   ethnic groups).

   National nostalgia is one type of collective nostalgia that is felt
   while self-categorizing as a citizen of a specific country, and is
   likely to be associated with particular intra- and intergroup attitudes
   and behavioral intentions. Just as personal nostalgia during times of
   change and upheaval can facilitate coping (e.g., attenuating
   loneliness) (Zhou et al., 2008), national nostalgia—a reverie for a
   country's good old days—may increase felt closeness to fellow natives
   during times of national stress or uncertainty. However, nostalgic
   revelry at the national level may exclude other citizens, such as
   recent immigrants or minorities (Smeekes and Jetten, 2019). Studies of
   national nostalgia among Dutch participants indicated that national
   nostalgia predicted prejudice toward religious minorities in the
   country (Smeekes et al., 2014) as well as prejudice toward Muslim
   countries (Smeekes, 2015). Notably, these outgroup attitudes were not
   predicted by personal nostalgia, which has been shown to be associated
   with decreased intergroup prejudice (Cheung et al., 2017). This
   distinction between personal and national nostalgia may lie in the
   extent to which outgroups pose an emotional threat to the self.

National Nostalgia and Outgroup Threat

   The intergroup threat theory (Stephan et al., 1999) posits that
--
   2a and 2b) prejudice toward non-White outgroups and pro-White
   attitudinal bias. One possible explanation on why national and personal
   nostalgia are associated with different intergroup attitudes may be due
   to different levels of social categorization evoked, leading to
   differing levels of perceived threat. Personal nostalgia, which is
   associated with continuity of personal identity (Sedikides et al.,
   2015a) and evokes strong feelings of social connectedness, also has
   downstream implications for reducing anxiety and hostility toward
   outgroup members (for a review, see Sedikides and Wildschut, 2019). In
   contrast, feeling national nostalgia is associated with
   self-categorizing at the group level, evoking one's national identity
   (Smeekes and Verkuyten, 2015). Similar to how personal nostalgia may be
   evoked when feeling disconnection at the individual level, national
   nostalgia has been shown to be evoked in response to existential
   concerns about one's group-based identity, and may have the beneficial
   effect of reducing anxiety by bolstering perceptions of group
   continuity and connection (Smeekes et al., 2018). For example, trait
   national nostalgia among Dutch participants was positively associated
   with wanting to protect national ingroup identity (Smeekes, 2015).
   Similarly, a cross-national survey across 27 countries found that
   existential concerns about the future of one's country predicted
   increased collective nostalgia, which in turn predicted greater ingroup
   belonging and anti-immigrant sentiment (Smeekes et al., 2018). However,
   when the presence or power of outgroups is salient (e.g., chronically
   or by the rhetoric of politicians), national nostalgia may increase
   perceived threat. Moreover, ingroup continuity may be threatened by
   consideration of outgroups (Smeekes et al., 2018). This may be
--
   distorted—for example, when whites in the United States feel a longing
   for a (whiter and more homogenized) past that never was. Thus, national
   nostalgia could increase this fear of the future, leading to increased
   prejudice.

--
   ethnic identities, we extended this line of inquiry by examining
   whether perceived intergroup threat explains any found relationship
   between national nostalgia and endorsement of symbolic prejudice.

National Nostalgia and Outgroup Perceptions in the Context of Political
Messaging

   Recent work has highlighted the prominence of national nostalgia in the
   rhetoric of right-wing populist political parties, and in particular
   its role in posing racial or national outgroups as scapegoats for
   perceived economic or cultural decline (Mols and Jetten, 2014; Smeekes
   et al., 2020). Political leaders often utilize national nostalgia in
   rhetorical strategy by emphasizing the discontinuity between a nation's
   past and present (Mols and Jetten, 2014), which then serves to evoke
   collective angst about group status (Smeekes et al., 2018). A content
   analysis of speeches by right-wing populist leaders in Western Europe
   found consistent themes of nostalgia for their country's “glorious
   past” while denigrating the country's present, as well as themes
   emphasizing that a) opponents of the party were the cause of this
--
   outlet for restoring psychological well-being by denigrating the
   outgroups believed to be responsible (Smeekes et al., 2018). Indeed,
   national nostalgia has been shown to explain support for right-wing
   populist policies and leaders via the denigration of immigrant and
   racial outgroups (Smeekes et al., 2020).
--

   To build upon this research, the aim of our study was to directly
   examine how voters' propensity to feel national nostalgia may explain
   support for Trump's populist rhetoric as well as increases in racial
   prejudice in the United States following the 2016 presidential election
--
The Current Study

   We examined the role of national nostalgia in propagating intergroup
   racial hostility above and beyond political orientation. We explored
   how national nostalgia relates to political and racial attitudes among
   voters who participated in the 2016 US presidential election. We also
   examined the interplay between national nostalgia, pro-Trump attitudes,
   outgroup prejudice, and perceived outgroup threat.

--
   office for some time, and whether the nostalgic message of “Making
   America Great Again” still resonated with voters. Minimal work on
   national nostalgia has been conducted, and to date, nearly all of this
   work has been conducted outside of the United States; thus, this
   research would explore the potential link between national nostalgia
   and political attitudes as well as study the phenomenon in the US
   sociopolitical landscape. In addition, we included a validated measure
   of personal nostalgia in order to better examine the association
   between personal and national nostalgia as well as to assess whether
   each type of nostalgia might be associated with political attitudes.

Hypotheses
--
   (https://osf.io/mwh6n).

   Hypothesis 1. National nostalgia would be positively related to
   pro-Trump attitudes (1a). No relationship was expected to be found
   between personal nostalgia and positive attitudes toward President
   Trump (1b).

--
   related to pro-Trump attitudes?

   Research Question 2. Will national nostalgia be positively related to
   racial prejudice?

   Research Question 3. Will the relationship between national nostalgia
   and racial prejudice be mediated by increased threat sensitivity?

--
Measures

Personal Nostalgia

   The Southampton Nostalgia Scale (SNS; Routledge et al., 2008) measured
   personal nostalgia, operationalized as how frequently participants
   experience nostalgia and how significant participants felt nostalgic
   experiences were to them. The scale included seven items (e.g., “How
   valuable is nostalgia for you?”) rated from 1 (Not at all) to 7 (Very
   much). To build on past national nostalgia research (Smeekes et al.,
   2014), we use a validated measure of personal nostalgia (proneness to
   feeling personal nostalgia).

National Nostalgia

   The National Nostalgia Scale (NNS; Smeekes et al., 2014, Study 1)
   measured participants' propensity to feel nostalgia on the basis of
   one's national ingroup membership. The scale included four items rated
   from 1 (Very rarely) to 5 (Very frequently) scale. The NNS used in this
--

   In terms of political attitudes, we wanted to assess positive sentiment
   toward the President as related to the experience of nostalgia.
   Therefore, we used a modified version of the State Functions of
   Nostalgia Scale (SFN; Hepper et al., 2012), which measures the extent
   to which nostalgia confers the positive benefits of social
   connectedness, well-being, self-regard, and overall positive affect.
   Each item was modified to assess how participants experienced these
--
   Table 1. To test our hypotheses, we conducted a series of hierarchical
   linear regression models and bootstrapped mediation and moderation
   analyses to assess the relationship between nostalgia (national and
   personal) and political and intergroup attitudes using SPSS v. 20 and
   Hayes' PROCESS macro v.3 (Hayes, 2013). Following these baseline
   models, we also support our findings using path analyses employing
   maximum likelihood estimation using IBM AMOS v. 26 (Due to a computer
   error, the national nostalgia data from 72 participants were unusable,
   reducing the n for analyses including national nostalgia to 193, still
   above the target based on the power analysis).
   TABLE 1
--
Main Hypothesis

   We first assessed whether national nostalgia and personal nostalgia
   would be related to pro-Trump attitudes in the ways previously
   predicted. National nostalgia and personal nostalgia proneness were
   entered simultaneously in step 2 of the model to identify their unique
   relationship with attitudes toward Trump. In step 1 of the hierarchical
--
   attitudes such that higher conservatism was associated with more
   positive attitudes of Trump, β = 0.59 t(192) = 10.08, p <lt; 0.001. In
   step 2 of the model, national nostalgia was associated with more
   pro-Trump attitudes above and beyond political affiliation, β = 0.30,
   t(192) = 4.43, p <lt; 0.001, supporting Hypothesis 1a. In contrast,
   personal nostalgia was not associated with pro-Trump attitudes above
   and beyond political orientation, β = −0.07, t(192) = −1.13, p = 0.259.
   Nostalgia predicted a significant proportion of variance in attitudes
   above and beyond political orientation, F[(2, 189)] = 9.90, p <lt; 0.001,
   R^2Δ = 0.06.
--
   To examine this relationship in a consolidated path model^5, Figure 1
   displays Path Model 1, quantifying the relationship between national
   and personal nostalgia and race, political orientation, ethnic identity
   salience, and pro-Trump attitudes. The model fit the data somewhat
   weakly due to the lower sample size [χ2(1) = 23.01, p <lt; 0.001; CFI =
   0.89; RMSEA = 0.34; SRMR = 0.03]. As shown in Model 1, Hypothesis 1 was
   again supported: national nostalgia predicted pro-Trump attitudes (β =
   0.24, p <lt; 0.001), whereas personal nostalgia was unrelated to pro-Trump
   attitudes (β = −0.08, p = 0.156).
   FIGURE 1
--

   Figure 1. Path analysis of relationships between national/personal
   nostalgia, ethnic identity, and pro-Trump attitudes (Model 1). Note.
   Path coefficients represent standardized estimates.

--

   We also examined whether racial identity salience qualified the
   relationship between national nostalgia and pro-Trump attitudes. A
   moderation analysis using Hayes' PROCESS macro (model 1) indicated that
   higher racial identity salience somewhat strengthened the relationship
   between national nostalgia and positive attitudes toward Trump, but
   only among White participants; ΔR^2 = 0.03, F[(1, 77)] = 3.94, p =
   0.051. Among those low in racial identity salience, national nostalgia
   was unrelated to attitudes toward Trump; b = 0.27, 95% CI = (−0.03,
   0.58). Those moderate [b = 0.43, 95% CI = (0.18, 70)] and high [b =
   0.64, 95% CI = (0.31, 0.97)] in racial identity salience showed a
   strong relationship between national nostalgia and pro-Trump attitudes.

   As a final examination of Research Question 1, a second path model
   (Path Model 2, Figure 4) was compared with Path Model 1 to again
   examine the interaction between nostalgia and ethnic identity (on
   pro-Trump attitudes), and the interaction between political orientation
   and race (assessing its relationship with ethnic identity). When
--
   on a continuous scale) was not significantly associated with ethnic
   identity (β = −0.08, p = 0.210). Additionally, the interaction term
   between national nostalgia and ethnic identity was no longer associated
   with pro-Trump attitudes (β = 0.13, p = 0.607). This suggests that for
   White participants, greater national nostalgia was associated with
   increased ethnic identity.
   FIGURE 4
--

   Figure 4. Path analysis estimating interaction effects (race ×
   political orientation and ethnic identity × nostalgia) on pro-Trump
   attitudes. Note. Path coefficients represent standardized estimates.

Research Question 2

   We next examined whether national nostalgia was positively related to
   racial prejudice. Bivariate correlations indicated that national
   nostalgia was positively associated with both anti-Black racial
   prejudice measured by the Symbolic Racism Scale (SRS) as well as
   perceived realistic threat measured by the Realistic Threat Scale (RTS,
   see Table 1). To further examine the link between national nostalgia
   and racial prejudice, we tested whether racial prejudice moderated the
   link between national nostalgia and positive attitudes toward President
   Trump using Hayes' PROCESS macro (model 1) with 5,000 resamples. A
   significant moderation effect was identified. Participants reporting
   higher prejudice exhibited a stronger relationship between national
   nostalgia and pro-Trump attitudes; ΔR^2 = 0.05, F[(1, 178)] = 19.60, p
   <lt; 0.001. Simple slopes were calculated and visualized using the
   interActive online utility, and are presented in Figure 5 (McCabe et
   al., 2018). The relationship between national nostalgia and positive
   attitudes toward Trump was non-significant at low levels of prejudice
   (those at least −1 SD below the mean of SNS). However, for those
   moderate to high in racial prejudice (0, +1, or +2 SDs above the mean
   of SNS), national nostalgia positively predicted pro-Trump attitudes
   (see Figure 5). Interestingly, this effect was found separately for
   both White [ΔR^2 = 0.03, F[(1, 77)] = 5.93, p = 0.02] and Black
   participants [ΔR^2 = 0.09, F[(1, 97)] = 17.44, p <lt; 0.001], but there
   was no significant three-way interaction between national nostalgia,
   prejudice, and race (p = 0.14), so the results in Figure 5 are
   displayed for all participants.
--
   www.frontiersin.org

   Figure 5. Relationship between national nostalgia and pro-Trump
   attitudes moderated by anti-Black racial prejudice. Note. Plots display
   simple slopes at −2, −1, 0, +1, and +2 SDs away from the mean of racial
--
Research Question 3

   Will the relationship between national nostalgia and racial prejudice
   be mediated by increased threat sensitivity?

   We last examined whether the relationship between national nostalgia
   and racial prejudice would be mediated by outgroup threat perception
   (measured by the Realistic Threat Scale, RTS). A moderated mediation
--
   European-American and African-American participants. As shown in Figure
   6, the model indicated a significant indirect effect of national
   nostalgia on prejudice through the mediator of perceived threat for
   both White/EA participants [β = 0.23, 95% CI = (0.12, 0.36)] and
   Black/AA participants [β = 0.22, 95% CI = (0.13, 0.32)]. The
--
   www.frontiersin.org

   Figure 6. Mediation of national nostalgia relationship with racial
   prejudice by outgroup threat perception, moderated by participant race.

   To examine this question in the context of a path model, Path Model 3
   (Figure 7) displays the proposed relationships between national
   nostalgia and racial prejudice. Model 3 showed a moderate fit with the
   data, χ(2) = 65.80, p <lt; 0.001; CFI = 0.79; RMSEA = 0.41; SRMR = 0.07).
   When accounting for political orientation, race, national nostalgia,
   personal nostalgia, racial threat sensitivity, and racial prejudice in
   a structural equation mediation model, national nostalgia directly
   predicted racial prejudice (β = 0.21, p <lt; 0.001), whereas personal
   nostalgia did not (β = 0.03, p = 0.581). The relationship between
   national nostalgia and racial prejudice was significantly mediated by
   threat sensitivity [indirect effect β = 0.18, 95% bias-corrected CI
   (0.10, 0.26)]. Interestingly, personal nostalgia also showed a weak
   indirect effect on national nostalgia via threat sensitivity, but in a
   negative direction [indirect effect β = −0.07, 95% bias-corrected CI
   (−0.14, −0.01)]. This suggests that greater personal nostalgia may
   weakly predict lower racial prejudice via reduced racial threat
   sensitivity.
--

   Figure 7. Path analysis of relationships between national/personal
   nostalgia and prejudice, mediated by racial threat sensitivity (Model
   3). Note. Path coefficients represent standardized estimates. Indirect
   effect of national nostalgia on racial prejudice through racial threat
   sensitivity was significant [β = 0.18; 95% bias-corrected CI (0.10,
   0.26)].
--
Discussion

   In our study, national nostalgia was associated with more positive
   feelings about President Trump, as well as increased perceived racial
   threat among White respondents. In contrast, personal nostalgia was
   unrelated to support for Trump or perceived racial threat. When
   assessed in a path model, personal nostalgia was actually associated
   indirectly with lower anti-Black prejudice via decreased racial threat
   sensitivity. These findings align with evidence from samples outside
   the United States (e.g., Smeekes and Verkuyten, 2015; Smeekes et al.,
   2020) that personal and national nostalgia are distinct experiences
   with unique ramifications for intergroup attitudes and relations.
   Though our overall finding that national nostalgia predicted Trump
   support could reflect a strong semantic connection between Trump and
   its 2016 presidential campaign slogan, it also may point to the appeal
   of Trump's campaign—and its right wing, populist sentiments—among those
   initially prone to feeling national nostalgia. To better answer this
   question, our next analyses investigated more closely the relationship
   between national nostalgia and identity.

   Our first research question asked whether identity was associated with
   national nostalgia. We found partial evidence for this idea, as
   Republican participants expressed greater positive attitudes toward
   Trump. However, there was no evidence of a relationship between race
--
   Trump's messaging appealed mostly to White voters. However, although
   race itself did not predict support for the President, racial identity
   salience moderated the link between national nostalgia and pro-Trump
   attitudes. White Republicans felt more strongly connected to their
   racial identity than Whites who identified as either Democrats or
--
   that the threat to White identity, along with other related constructs,
   may influence political attitudes and may also offer an explanation on
   why leaders invoking national nostalgia may be so attractive to some
   individuals. This type of rhetoric typically emphasizes collective
   identity discontinuity in order to foment anxiety about the state of
--

   The role of intergroup attitudes was apparent when examining the
   relationship between national nostalgia and pro-Trump support. We found
   that national nostalgia significantly predicted racial prejudice and
   that this relationship was mediated by perceived outgroup threat.
   Interestingly, this mediational effect was found among both White/EA
   and Black/AA participants, although the lack of a significant
   interaction effect may have been due to lower power. Additionally, we
   found a stronger relationship between national nostalgia and pro-Trump
   attitudes among those who reported more prejudice toward Black
   individuals. These findings align with evidence that group emotions
--
   when outgroups are perceived to be a threat (Smith et al., 2007;
   Wildschut et al., 2014). In particular, these findings align with
   converging evidence that the content of collective nostalgia—what
   individuals perceive to be “the good old days” for their identity
   group—reflects salient sources of perceived threat (Wohl et al., 2020).
   This conceptual model, highlighting the content of collective
   nostalgia, also explains differences between the emotional outcomes of
   personal and national nostalgia. Whereas, personal nostalgia enhances
   feelings of belonging by evoking memories of positive intrapersonal
   experiences in the face of ostracism or loneliness, national nostalgia
   may enhance belongingness by evoking positive thoughts about the “good
   old days” when one's group was perceived to be higher in status or less
   threatened by outgroups. It is also possible that national nostalgia,
   like personal nostalgia, may enhance feelings of continuity in its own
   way, by allowing individuals to feel connected to a time in which they
   believed their ingroup identity was less threatened or somehow
   stronger. Recent work supports the notion that, analogous to personal
   nostalgia, enhancing feelings of self-continuity (Sedikides and
   Wildschut, 2019), national nostalgia is linked to feelings of ingroup
   continuity (Smeekes et al., 2018). A study across 27 countries found
   that national nostalgia was associated with stronger feelings of
   ingroup continuity (Smeekes et al., 2018); ingroup belonging but not
   prejudice (outgroup rejection) appeared to mediate this link. Since
   relatively little research on collective nostalgia, particularly
   national nostalgia, has been undertaken, future work should examine
   these questions via multiple methods, particularly longitudinal and
   experimental designs, which can identify whether and to what extent
   self-continuity is enhanced by (or itself predicts) collective
   nostalgia in response to outgroup threat.

Constraint on Generalizability
--
   Additionally, these considerations of intergroup threat perception and
   prejudice are most generalizable to White/EA and Black/AA social groups
   within the United States, and future analysis of national nostalgia
   should continue to assess different ethnicities, races, and other
   relevant social categories.
--
Future Directions

   These findings raise the question on whether national nostalgia stems
   from a desire by some to go back in time, due to perceived group
   identity threats. Future research should employ longitudinal or
   experimental methods, such as manipulating identity threat, to examine
   whether national nostalgia arises as a defense against perceived
   threats to one's ingroup. Relatedly, it is only recently that national
   nostalgia has been manipulated (Smeekes and Verkuyten, 2015; Wohl et
   al., 2020), as the majority of national nostalgia research has been at
   the trait level. Further work evoking national nostalgia in
   experimental contexts would allow us to better understand how this
   emotion interacts with intergroup attitudes, prejudice, and feelings of
--

   An additional question to be explored is the extent to which national
   nostalgia operates within specific cultures and nations. Although
   Trump's presidential tenure has ended, the importance of these findings
   is not constrained only to the rhetoric from his campaign. Rather, the
   use of national nostalgia in political communication is widespread
   (Mols and Jetten, 2014; Smeekes et al., 2020) and has far-reaching
   implications. Future research should examine the role of national
   nostalgia in shaping attitudes toward demagogues in a variety of
   settings and when considering a variety of societal outcomes. Our
   findings suggest that national nostalgia may influence intergroup
   attitudes as a group-based emotion broadly through evoking positive
   emotions about one's national group identity. However, the nature of
--
   recent history, and a call to return to a former time may imply a call
   for a return to a former and less egalitarian social hierarchy. Future
   research on national nostalgia should explore the nuances of this
   emotion and its expression among various ethnic and social groups in
   different countries. Expressions of national nostalgia may evoke
   intergroup hostility to a lesser extent within nations with different
   histories.
--
Coda

   National nostalgia, a form of collective nostalgic experience, is a
   promising lens through which to analyze attitudes, such as political
   and prejudicial attitudes, particularly when combined with assessments
   of identity salience and perceived outgroup threat. Research to date on
   national nostalgia is relatively new. Although this phenomenon has been
   studied elsewhere (mostly in European and Asian nations), this is the
   first study, to our knowledge, to examine the US political landscape.
   Personal nostalgia—a wistful longing for one's personal past—does not
   have the same associations with political and group attitudes, and only
   moderately correlates with national nostalgia. In contrast, national
   nostalgia, particularly in combination with white identity salience and
   outgroup threat perception, predicted both prejudice and political
   attitudes.

   There may be some irony in the possibility that national nostalgia may
   include beliefs for a past that never was; in this case, an America
   that was not as white as some recollect. Nevertheless, these national
--
   group to the Caucasian sample.

   3. ^The Pearson correlation between national nostalgia and outgroup
   prejudice reported by Smeekes and Verkuyten, 2015, study 2).

--
   time this study was developed. However, the decision was made prior to
   data collection to utilize this validated scale as a more direct and
   statistically sound way to measure the construct of national nostalgia.

   5. ^Although structural equation models are often used to model paths
   among composite variables (such as national and personal nostalgia), we
   opted to use a path model for these analyses given that our sample was
   not large enough to justify inclusion of all individual items in the
--

   Barrett, F. S., Grimm, K. J., Robins, R. W., Wildschut, T., Sedikides,
   C., and Janata, P. (2010). Music-evoked nostalgia: affect, memory, and
   personality. Emotion 10, 390–403. doi: 10.1037/a0019006

--

   Batcho, K. I., DaRin, M. L., Nave, A. M., and Yaworsky, R. R. (2008).
   Nostalgia and identity in song lyrics. Psychol. Aesth. Creativ. Arts 2,
   236–244. doi: 10.1037/1931-3896.2.4.236

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Brownstein, R. (2016, June 2). Trump's rhetoric of White nostalgia. The
   Atlantic. Available online at:
   https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/06/trumps-rhetoric-of
   -white-nostalgia/485192/

   Google Scholar

   Cheung, W. Y., Hepper, E. G., Reid, C. A., Green, J. D., Wildschut, T.,
   and Sedikides, C. (2020). Anticipated nostalgia: looking forward to
   looking back. Cogn. Emot. 34, 511–525. doi:
   10.1080/02699931.2019.1649247
--
   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Cheung, W. Y., Sedikides, C., and Wildschut, T. (2017). Nostalgia
   proneness and reduced prejudice. Pers. Individ. Dif. 109, 89–97. doi:
   10.1016/j.paid.2016.12.045
--

   Dimitriadou, M., Maciejovsky, B., Wildschut, T., and Sedikides, C.
   (2019). Collective nostalgia and domestic country bias. J. Exp.
   Psychol. Appl. 25, 445–457. doi: 10.1037/xap0000209

--

   Green, J. D., Cairo, A. H., Sedikides, S., and Wildschut. (2021). The
   ties that bind: university nostalgia fosters relational and collective
   university engagement. Front. Soc. Psychol. 11:580731. doi:
   10.3389/fpsyg.2020.580731
--

   Hepper, E. G., Ritchie, T. D., Sedikides, C., and Wildschut, T. (2012).
   Odyssey's end: Lay conceptions of nostalgia reflect its original
   Homeric meaning. Emotion 12, 102–119. doi: 10.1037/a0025167

--

   Martinovic, B., Jetten, J., Smeekes, A., and Verkuyten, M. (2017).
   Collective memory of a dissolved country: group-based nostalgia and
   guilt assignment as predictors of interethnic relations between
   diaspora groups from former Yugoslavia. J. Soc. Political Psychol. 5,
--

   Reid, C. A., Green, J. D., Wildschut, T., and Sedikides, C. (2015).
   Scent-evoked nostalgia. Memory 23, 157–166. doi:
   10.1080/09658211.2013.876048

--

   Routledge, C., Arndt, J., Sedikides, C., and Wildschut, T. (2008). A
   blast from the past: the terror management function of nostalgia. J.
   Exp. Soc. Psychol. 44, 132–140. doi: 10.1016/j.jesp.2006.11.001

--

   Sedikides, C., and Wildschut, T. (2019). The sociality of personal and
   collective nostalgia. Eur. Rev. Soc. Psychol. 30, 123–173. doi:
   10.1080/10463283.2019.1630098

--

   Sedikides, C., Wildschut, T., Arndt, J., and Routledge, C. (2008).
   Nostalgia: past, present, and future. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 17,
   304–307. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8721.2008.00595.x

--

   Sedikides, C., Wildschut, T., Routledge, C., and Arndt, J. (2015a).
   Nostalgia counteracts self-discontinuity and restores self continuity.
   Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 45, 52–61. doi: 10.1002/ejsp.2073

--
   Google Scholar

   Smeekes, A. (2015). National nostalgia: a group-based emotion that
   benefits the in-group but hampers intergroup relations. Int. J.
   Intercult. Relat. 49, 54–67. doi: 10.1016/j.ijintrel.2015.07.001
--

   Smeekes, A., and Jetten, J. (2019). Longing for one's home country:
   national nostalgia and acculturation among immigrants and natives. Int.
   J. Intercult. Relat. 69, 131–150. doi: 10.1016/j.ijintrel.2019.02.001

--

   Smeekes, A., Verkuyten, M., and Martinovic, B. (2014). Longing for the
   country's good old days: national nostalgia, autochthony beliefs, and
   opposition to Muslim expressive rights. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 54,
   561–580. doi: 10.1111/bjso.12097
--

   Smeekes, A., Wildschut, T., and Sedikides, C. (2020). Longing for the
   “good old days” of our country: national nostalgia as a new
   master-frame of populist radical-right parties. J. Theoret. Soc.
   Psychol. doi: 10.1002/jts5.78
--

   van Dijke, M., Wildschut, T., Leunissen, J., and Sedikides, C. (2015).
   Nostalgia buffers the negative impact of low procedural justice on
   cooperation. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 127, 15–29. doi:
   10.1016/j.obhdp.2014.11.005
--

   Wildschut, T., Bruder, M., Robertson, S., van Tilburg, W. A. P., and
   Sedikides, C. (2014). Collective nostalgia: a group-level emotion that
   confers unique benefits on the group. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 107,
   844–863. doi: 10.1037/a0037760
--

   Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Arndt, J., and Routledge, C. (2006).
   Nostalgia: content, triggers, functions. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 91,
   975–993. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.91.5.975

--

   Wohl, M. J., Stefaniak, A., and Smeekes, A. (2020). Longing is in the
   memory of the beholder: collective nostalgia content determines the
   method members will support to make their group great again. J. Exp.
   Soc. Psychol. 91:104044. doi: 10.1016/j.jesp.2020.104044
--

   Zhou, X., Sedikides, C., Wildschut, T., and Gao, D. G. (2008).
   Counteracting loneliness: on the restorative function of nostalgia.
   Psychol. Sci. 19, 1023–1029. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02194.x

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Keywords: national nostalgia, prejudice, intergroup relations, emotion,
   political differences

   Citation: Behler AMC, Cairo A, Green JD and Hall C (2021) Making
   America Great Again? National Nostalgia's Effect on Outgroup
   Perceptions. Front. Psychol. 12:555667. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.555667

--
This article is part of the Research Topic

   Current Issues in Nostalgia Research
   View all 13 Articles
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-41">
<text>
   #The School Of Life » Overcoming Nostalgia for a Past Relationship
   Comments Feed alternate alternate alternate

--
   Relationships • Breaking Up &amp; Heartbreak

Overcoming Nostalgia for a Past Relationship

   After considerable agony, we’ve left a relationship. We’re on our own
--
   genuine mistake. But it’s even more likely that we are in the grip of a
   characteristic mental habit of the newly single, facing the vertigo of
   independence: nostalgia.

   In the middle of the nineteenth century, Britain underwent industrial
--
     * 09. What If I Just Repeat the Same Mistakes Next Time?
     * 10. Are My Expectations Too High?
     * 11. Overcoming Nostalgia for a Past Relationship
     * 12. The Feeling of Being Back in Love with the Person You're About
       to Leave
--
     * 06. Our Tragic Condition
     * 07. The Melancholy Charm of Lonely Travelling Places
     * 08. Nostalgia for Religion
     * 09. Parties and Melancholy
     * 10. Why Very Beautiful Scenes Can Make Us So Melancholy
--
     * 15. Sex and Melancholy
     * 16. Astronomy and Melancholy
     * 17. Nostalgia for the Womb
     * 18. Melancholy and the Feeling of Being Superfluous
     * 19. Pills &amp; Melancholy
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-42">
<text>
   #Constructed Nostalgia for Rock’s Golden Age: “I Believe in Yesterday”
   La nostalgie construite Volume !, Numéros Volume !, Documents

--
   La revue des musiques populaires

   AccueilTous les numéros11 : 1Rock &amp; chansonConstructed Nostalgia for
   Rock’s ...

--
   Rock &amp; chanson

Constructed Nostalgia for Rock’s Golden Age: “I Believe in Yesterday”

   Deena Weinstein
--
   The phenomenon of rock’s past having occluded its present is examined
   through the intentionality that grounds it culturally. Specifically,
   neo-nostalgia (Jameson) and similar postmodern terms (simulation,
   construction) constitute the intentionality and the commercial
   interests of the music industry and the generational power of the Baby
   Boomers and Gen X are the structural determinants. Neo-nostalgia for
   rock’s past is directed toward an aestheticized imaginary of rock’s
   golden age — a mythical time that never was, rather than a supposed
   eternal transcendent (religion) or an individualized empirical past
   (homesickness). Nostalgia for a construction, fabricated for corporate
   profit and generational/parental power, is a depthless and riskless
   adventure for a generation that experiences severe constraints on its
--
Keywords:

   memory / nostalgia / retro, music / recording industry, mainstream /
   commercialism / commodification, marketing / communication /
   advertising, authenticity, age / generation, archives / reissues /
--

   Rock Zombies Invade The Living
   Constructed Nostalgia
   Commodification of Nostalgia
   Youth without Youth
   Conclusion
--
   Knebworth festival Afficher l’image

   1Nostalgia isn’t what it used to be and neither is rock. In a sense,
   rock today is even more what it used to be while nostalgia, especially
   nostalgia about rock music, has changed so much that it deserves a new
   name. It once referred to direct experience; now it is mainly a
   cultural construction, so it would be more precise to refer to it as
   cultural nostalgia. Both nostalgia and rock have had their own
   histories, the first as old as the human past itself, and, the second
   inaugurated in the middle of the last century.

   The relationship between nostalgia and rock has flipped – originally
   nostalgia was often influenced by rock, whereas today rock is impelled
   by nostalgia’s new incarnation. The following discussion traces the
   conjunction of rock and nostalgia in terms of a general (post-modern)
   cultural analysis and its social-structural grounds.

--
     Thinking””.

Constructed Nostalgia

   11Rock hasn’t changed to become exactly what it used to be. It carries
   a severely edited version of its past with many artists and recordings
   redacted, and others, especially those from the late 1960s and early
   1970s, bolded and underlined. On the other hand, nostalgia is something
   more than it has been with a history far older than the word itself.

     The oldest form of nostalgia, first documented in those who lived
     and died in the same community in which they were born, was for some
     mythic past. It was a past when the gods interacted with humans. In
--
     Eden. It was the home of human beings, the home of us all, a
     wonderful place-time to which we could never “return,” providing
     that dual sweet and bitter feeling that characterizes nostalgia.

   12Nostalgia’s second incarnation, adding to but not erasing that
   originary type, began once there were armies stationed or fighting for
   years in foreign lands, sailors, traders, or explorers discovering “new
   worlds,” and whole communities forced from their ancestral lands. This
   new type was a longing to return to a real, not ideal, site, in which
   people once lived. By the 17^th century, such nostalgia was understood,
   at least by the Swiss whose mercenary armies experienced it, as a
   medical problem. Many soldiers pining for home physically deteriorated
--
   doctor Johannes Hofer, who coined his neologism in 1688 from two Greek
   words, nost (return or home) and algia (pain) (Hofer, 1688). This
   pre-industrial denotation of nostalgia as a desire to return to one’s
   native land, or the bittersweet memories of it, persisted and is still
   in use. For example, the Irish escaping famine and populating the
--
   in shebeens and then saloons and sing Irish songs (Rosenzweig, 1983).

   Perhaps for some, the object of nostalgia is a place, but, less than a
   century later, one of Hofer’s countrymen, Jean Jacques Rousseau, would
   interpret the term in a broader way. In his Dictionary of Music,
--
   childhood as his youth itself. He is not straining toward something
   which he can repossess, but toward an age which is forever beyond his
   reach” (Kant, 1798: 95). Rousseau and Kant comprehend nostalgia as it
   has mainly been understood in the modern world. Lunching with a friend,
   a professor of art about 50 years old, I asked him about the music he
--
   him a strong sense of his self? “Yes, definitely.”

   14The third incarnation of nostalgia is the meaning that characterizes
   the current period and that applies to the domination of rock’s past
   over its present. Whereas originary nostalgia was directed toward a
   mythical “golden age” that was deemed to have existed and was lost, and
   modern nostalgia refers to an individualized experienced past that can
   no longer be recovered, contemporary nostalgia is a construct of the
   communications media that is directed to a simulation of a
   de-individualized empirical past that never existed as such and is not
   directly part of the lives of the individuals who experience the
   nostalgia.

   15Contemporary nostalgia is neither for everyone’s personal past nor
   for a concrete individual’s life history, but for a social
   construction. It is constructed nostalgia that the students who would
   prefer to have lived in the 1960s or in some later decades of the
   twentieth century, feel (e.g. “I would have rather been a teenager in
--
   rock functions here as a “memorative sign” for a representation, a sign
   for a sign. As Pickering and Keightley (2006: 929) grasp it,
   contemporary nostalgia is self-referential: the individual who feels it
   is engaged in a process of “mediated nostalgic remembering.”

   In his commentary on Frederic Jameson’s discussion of nostalgia in
   postmodernity, Brown defines Jameson’s notion of “neo-nostalgia” as
   “the pseudo-historical appeal of a bygone aesthetic.” That appeal “is
   achieved by stylistic evocations and temporal stereotypes, which convey
   various forms of past-ness”(Brown, 2001: 310).

   16Nostalgia for rock’s past is a form of “mediated nostalgic
   remembering.” There was, indeed, an empirical past of rock, but it has
   been taken up in the present as mediated and then re-mediated to
   create, for example, the 1960s as a set of selective representations in
   which some artists, music, and events are highlighted and others
   eliminated. In that process of selection and simplification, nostalgia
   is aestheticized – it becomes a pose that can be felt intensely, but
   that does not connect the individual to an “eternal tradition” or to a
   personal history, but to an image lacking insistency.

   17Aestheticized nostalgia for past rock lacks seriousness in the sense
   that it does not instigate any attempt by those who feel it to try to
   recreate the past, except sporadically and episodically. To dwell in
   the constructed golden age is to experience its culture as an imaginary
   (similar to originary nostalgia), but also as the survival of an
   empirical past in which there is interest but no commitment.

   That aestheticized nostalgia should have come to be the dominant
   intentionality towards rock might be an irony, since rock’s ideology
   privileges authenticity and novelty as the requisites for having one’s
--
   reversal have happened?

Commodification of Nostalgia

   18Why has rock’s past swamped its present? Why is rock today mired in
   neo-nostalgia? There are two major structural determinants of this
   constructed nostalgia. The major one is economic, essentially,
   commercial capitalism doing what it is supposed to do. Each of the
   companies that comprise the complex of the rock industry is focused on
--
   audiences. To make audiences desire the “back catalog,” they have also
   had to promote rock’s past and construct a simulation of the past that
   would instigate neo-nostalgia.

   That is exactly what the big players have done, aided and abetted by a
--
   33Writers and documentarians, accompanying the major record labels,
   concert promoters and classic rock djs, create an auratic imaginary of
   rock’s past that breeds neo-nostalgia. These hypesters of the canon
   create some Golden Age that never was, but can be heard in this $100
   box set, or seen for a few hours and $355 in person. These writers and
--

   Mass media reports on the death further reinforce that
   nostalgia-inducing imaginary. The innumerable TV, radio, magazine, and
   newspaper accounts of Lennon’s death referenced not the man and the
   four decades in which he lived, or even the nearly two decades in which
--

   The imaginary is also alive and well in video games like the Guitar
   Hero and Rock Band franchises. These simulations foster neo-nostalgia
   for an aestheticized golden age, a simulation itself. Hodson’s analysis
   of the Beatles Rock Band Game is illustrative. “The game produces a
--
   relationship to commodity over community” he writes (Hodson, 2012: 72).
   “Rather than just a commodification of play, Beatles Rock Band is a
   game that also commodifies nostalgia” (Hodson, 2012: 81).

   37For Jameson, neo-nostalgia is a matter of substituting an
   imaginary/construction/simulation/myth for what actually presumably
   happened at some time in the past. Neo-nostalgia takes that
   construction as its object and then judges the present to be inferior
   to the construction — it would have been better to live then, but at
--
   factor — the power of the Boomer generation especially in the US —
   insured that hegemony. The cultural power of the baby-boomers is a
   second structural foundation for constructed nostalgia.

   39The most obvious factor in boomer-power is the fact that Boomers
--
   their rock, listening to it, or to the newer music made by the bands of
   the late 1960s and early 1970s. Their music was, in Rousseau’s (1768:
   267) term, a “memorative sign”, creating a sense of nostalgia, in
   Kant’s sense, “toward an age which is forever beyond his reach” (Kant,
   1798). As these bands began to be seen as “great” aesthetically, they
--
   Alternative rock, R.E.M., Nirvana, Pearl Jam, and Smashing Pumpkins
   were among the commercially most successful. It has turned out that
   Gen-X was the last generation before neo-nostalgia buried new musical
   initiatives by young people.

--
   generation, which has substituted the effect of “youthfulness” for
   actual youth itself — another aestheticization and simulation that
   accompanies and is bound up with neo-nostalgia.

Conclusion
--
   sense, youth.

   51 Neo-nostalgia — Frederic Jameson’s precise contribution to
   postmodern discourse — is the framing intentionality of the event of
   rock’s past occluding its present. (New rock has not disappeared: it
--
   an overhanging past in Baudrillard’s Simulations (1983), the critique
   of the modern culminates with its subjective component in
   (neo)nostalgia.

   52 The myth of rock’s “golden age” is an aetheticization of rock’s
--
   artifact.

   53Neo-nostalgia for rock’s past is a riskless adventure.
   Haut de page

--

   Hodson, J. (2012), “When I'm Sixty-Four: Beatles Rock Band and the
   Commodification of Nostalgia”, Loading… The Journal of the Canadian
   Game Studies Association, vol. 6, n° 10, 72-89.

   Hofer, J. (1688), Dissertatio Medica de Nostalgia, Bâle, J. Bertsch
   [cited in Starobinski].

--
   October 2014]

   Pickering, M. &amp; Keightley, E. (2006), “The Modalities of Nostalgia”,
   Current Sociology, vol. 54, n° 6, November, 919–941.

--
   [1768, cited in Starobinski].

   Starobinski, J. (1966), “The Idea of Nostalgia”, trans. W.S. Kemp,
   Diogenes vol. 54, 81-103.

--
Référence papier

   Deena Weinstein, « Constructed Nostalgia for Rock’s Golden Age: “I
   Believe in Yesterday” », Volume !, 11 : 1 | 2014, 20-36.

Référence électronique

   Deena Weinstein, « Constructed Nostalgia for Rock’s Golden Age: “I
   Believe in Yesterday” », Volume ! [En ligne], 11 : 1 | 2014, mis en
   ligne le 30 décembre 2016, consulté le 17 décembre 2022. URL :
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-43">
<text>
   Scroll To Top

Five Ways Nostalgia Can Improve Your Well-Being

Some recent studies suggest that experiencing nostalgia about our past can
make us happier and more resilient during times of stress.

--
   me a bittersweet feeling—a mixture of joy, sadness, and longing.

   While I find nostalgia pleasant overall and even inspiring, doctors and
   psychologists did not always consider it a good thing. Staying “stuck
   in the past” was often associated with being unable to adjust to new
   realities, like when soldiers were nostalgic for their faraway homes
   and experienced loneliness and dread. Not that long ago, some
   considered nostalgia to be a mental illness, akin to melancholy, which
   could lead to anxiety, depression, and sleep disorders.

   But more recent findings on nostalgia suggest it can be good for us,
   increasing our well-being, making us feel connected to other people,
   and giving us a sense of continuity in our lives. And it seems to come
   on naturally when we need to weather life’s difficulties. Rather than
   being a problem, nostalgia can help bring happiness and meaning to our
   lives.

--
   well-being.

   Here are some of the ways nostalgia can benefit us, according to
   science.

Nostalgia makes us feel socially connected

   Nostalgia about our past often includes recalling important people in
   our lives—people who cared about us and made us feel like we belonged.
   Certainly, my own nostalgic musings are centered around times when I
--
   with older adults—they felt less prejudice toward that group.

   Nostalgia also seems to help us maintain our relationships. For
   example, one study found that inducing nostalgia helped people feel
   more optimistic about relationships in general and more willing to
   connect with friends. Another study found that when induced to feel
   nostalgia, people (especially those who find connecting with others
   easier) felt more able to offer emotional support to the people in
   their lives.

Nostalgia helps us find meaning in life

   A sense of meaning in life involves knowing that your existence matters
--
   strive for in one way or another.

   Fortunately, research suggests nostalgia can be an important resource
   for increasing meaning, by highlighting central moments in our lives
   and giving us a sense of continuity.

   In one study, researchers compared nostalgia to two seemingly related
   forms of thinking about one’s life: recalling a positive past event or
   imagining a desired future. Focusing on an event that made them
--
   So take a moment to ponder the following question: In the grand scheme
   of things, how significant are you?”—they naturally turned to feelings
   of nostalgia for relief from that sense of meaninglessness.

   These findings and others suggest that nostalgia not only heightens
   your sense of meaning in life, but can act as a buffer when you
   experience a loss of meaning. And it may help you move forward in life,
   too. As one study found, nostalgia can increase your motivation to
   pursue important life goals, because it increases meaning—not just
   because it puts you in a better mood.

Nostalgia can make us happier

   Though it does seem to do just that—to boost our mood. Even though
   nostalgia is by definition a blend of positive and negative emotion,
   the positive tends to outweigh the negative, meaning we feel happier
   overall.

   In one very recent study, 176 university students were randomly
   assigned to a six-week nostalgia program where they were asked weekly
   to write about a past event that brought on “a sentimental longing for
   the past” (while a control group wrote about past events that were
--
       Try It Now

   The researchers found that nostalgia was generally beneficial, leading
   people to experience more positive emotions, life satisfaction, and
   well-being, as well as fewer negative emotions—at least three weeks
   into the program. These benefits mostly disappeared after that—except
   for people who started the experiment already engaging in nostalgia
   regularly. For them, going through the nostalgia program brought them
   greater life satisfaction and fewer negative emotions up to a month
   later, possibly because the program was a better fit for them.

   A lot of the benefits on happiness may be connected to nostalgia’s
   effects on social connection and meaning. But it could also be that
   nostalgia helps us see ourselves in a truer, more authentic light.

Nostalgia puts us in touch with our authentic selves

   When thinking nostalgically about our past, we are the prime
   protagonists in our own life stories. Perhaps because of this,
   nostalgia helps us to see our lives as continuous and coherent,
   providing us with a sense of authenticity.

--

   The researchers also studied how threats to one’s sense of self might
   make people engage in more nostalgia. Half of the participants read
   this text: “Many people feel that they have two sides to themselves.
   One side is the person that they show to other people; the other side
--
   participants wrote about their daily routines and when those routines
   were disrupted. Then, both groups reported on their positive and
   negative emotions, as well as feelings of nostalgia.

    Findings showed that people who focused on threats to their
   self-concept experienced more negative emotions, and in turn felt more
   nostalgic. This suggests that nostalgia helps put us in touch with our
   “real selves” and protects us against threats to our authenticity.

   Perhaps for this reason, engaging in nostalgia can lead to personal
   growth. At least one study found that feeling nostalgia made people
   feel more positively about themselves, which, in turn, made them more
   open to experiencing new things, expanding their horizons, and being
   curious—all signs of psychological health.

Nostalgia may help people who feel disillusioned or depressed

   Perhaps because of these potential benefits, people tend to engage in
   nostalgia when they are feeling down, lonely, or disillusioned. Many
   studies have found that nostalgia seems to protect people from negative
   mind states, bringing about a kind of emotional homeostasis.

   Of course, that doesn’t mean that nostalgia is always good or can’t
   have a downside. If nostalgia makes us spend too much time thinking
   about our past, it may prevent us from recognizing the joy in our lives
   right here and now. And, since we tend to engage in nostalgia when
   negative things occur, it could become an avoidance strategy that keeps
   us from dealing with present problems in more effective ways.

   Encouraging groups of people to feel nostalgic could also have negative
   consequences. For example, one study found that nostalgia made people
   more likely to believe political claims, regardless of their veracity.
   Inducing nostalgia could be an advertising ploy used to affect consumer
   behavior, which could lead to poor choices, too.

   Still, chances are that nostalgia is more a blessing than a curse, and
   a winning strategy for feeling better about ourselves. It can increase
   our connection to others, our sense of meaning in our lives, our
   authenticity, and our happiness. So, why not tune into nostalgia now
   and then? It may just help you meet the challenges of the moment.
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-44">
<text>
Visual Art

Will We Feel Nostalgia for 2020?

Elijah Teitelbaum | Issue 108
--
   refuge. History appears far more stable than it ever actually was; even
   the recent past has aged rapidly under layers of rose-tinted patina.
   Indeed, nostalgia is all around us these days. Old films are constantly
   being rebooted, the eighties are in style, and home-baking traditions
   have been rediscovered in lockdown.

   While seeking comfort in the familiar might seem simplistic, the ways
   we generate and consume nostalgia make it complex: how we perceive and
   connect to the past makes it an important medium for the cultural and
   political narratives which shape our communities. Art and popular media
--
   What were once ordinary ways communities came together—worship, bars,
   celebrations, guests—have accrued overtones of danger. We have had to
   rethink how to connect with one another, and nostalgia plays an
   important role here: when we are able to see that others share our
   affinity for the past, and that we locate common values there, we gain
   a language for our contemporary communities. Though we often think of
   our nostalgia as being for an irrevocable past, it is actually about
   our present imagination and concerns.

   Our communal attraction to nostalgia, our ways of fitting the past into
   the present, represent historical memory in flexible, complex, and
   often troubled ways. Sometimes we see this, and sometimes we don’t.
   Nostalgia’s simplification of the past is often overt and obvious, but
   our desires for the feel of a synagogue sanctuary or a Sunday brunch
   can be covertly nostalgic in ways we might not realize. Nonetheless,
   the relationship between history and memory remains constant: our
   nostalgia places our values first, then imagines histories which embody
   those values, independent of actual experience.

--
   reality—by the fact that this person was here, or this action took
   place—but are connected through our own perception of the past.
   Nostalgia too, as culturally mediated memory, is defined by how we
   approach it, rather than what it refers to. This makes it a
   particularly useful way for communities to tell stories about their
--

   If the past is so flexible, perhaps we should think about how our
   current moment will age. Will we feel nostalgia for 2020? The question
   seems absurd. Why would anyone feel nostalgia for a moment synonymous
   with division, danger, and unrest? As the turn of the year approached
   and the pandemic wore on, the arrival of 2021 was imbued with
--

   It is important to ask this question because, as Attie attests, the
   links between history and memory, memory and nostalgia, are not as
   intuitive as they appear. On closer inspection, many nostalgic periods
   reveal their roots in moments of similar distress. The 1950s’ quaint
--
   feel differently about 2020 further down the road.

   While nostalgia often paints over history in broad strokes, it is not
   about burying the past. It is not as though hardship and pain simply
   vanish. Rather, suffering is placed in other frames of reference which
   de-emphasize it—or grant it a redeeming significance. These reactions
   capitalize on the fact that memory speaks to the present: our nostalgia
   is something which takes place in this moment. How people approach
   history is informed first and foremost by what they care about in the
--
   Bronzeville. As the neighborhood grew, pressure increased to prevent
   further racial integration with other areas of Chicago. Michelle Boyd
   drives this home in her book Jim Crow Nostalgia: Reconstructing Race in
   Bronzeville, where she describes how, beginning in the early twentieth
   century, “Whites responded to Blacks’ visibility and quest for economic
--
   authenticity perceived in Bronzeville’s Black culture is due to the
   forced concentration of Black Americans within this bounded space.
   Contemporary nostalgia tends to glide over this, highlighting the
   cultural value of these communities instead. In the neighborhood today,
   murals emphasize the strength of a cohesive Black community without
   dwelling much on why it was a minority enclave in the first place.

   What does this say about nostalgia’s relation to the past? Are
   Bronzeville’s warm memories at risk if their historical picture becomes
   fully exposed? Not quite. Nostalgia, after all, is a contemporary way
   of approaching the past that puts a present community’s values first.
   The disjunction between nostalgia and history reveals not so much a
   deficiency of memory as a priority for what matters here and now.
   Looking to Bronzeville of the 1940s as a vibrant and cohesive Black
--

   These connections locate what is really important for nostalgic
   individuals and groups. Their nostalgia is about defining, envisioning,
   and supporting a perspective on history—on values, culture, and
   experiences—which connects with their contemporary concerns. This way
   of identifying what is valuable in certain nostalgic moments
   demonstrates how nostalgia is itself an inflected connection to the
   past. Even when that past includes seemingly insurmountable obstacles
   to this attachment, such as racial segregation, what is most important
--
   over its challenging aspects, as with segregation or persecution. In
   some cases, that pain can be recontextualized as a meaningful feature
   of the nostalgia itself. This is how many Jews have valorized their
   eastern European, “old world” predecessors. Those Jews and their
   communities were shaped by anti-Semitic restrictions which opposed
--
   exclusion has been recast as a narrative about communal vibrancy.

   Unlike nostalgia for Bronzeville, Jewish nostalgia for the old world
   embraces its very pain and trauma. While nostalgia for Bronzeville has
   recast the fact of segregation within an aspirational narrative, the
   way that these Jewish communities are depicted often stresses their
--

   Now, Lilien himself had his own aims for his artwork, and was not
   especially interested in casting eastern Europe as a site of nostalgia,
   but the messages he advanced became important for later nostalgic
   perspectives. In this image, religious overtones dominate, not only in
--
   writes, eastern European Jews’ struggle is nostalgically depicted “as
   the handmaiden of deep spirituality, intellectualism, and generosity.”
   And so, while nostalgia does not repress this struggle, it wholly
   recasts it from its immediate distress.

--

   This kind of thinking about the past underscores that pain does not
   preclude nostalgia. We can feel warmly about moments that are hurtful
   and dangerous. We can feel affinity for times that we would not
   actually want to live in. What is most important to recognize in these
--
   contextualized and what they imply: whether they recall ongoing
   struggles, as with Bronzeville, or emphasize what people value within
   their nostalgia, as with Kishinev.

   Sarah Weal. Ruth, Scarlett, and David, 2020. From the series Furloughed
--
     __________________________________________________________________

   The pandemic has created a moment for which nostalgia at first seems
   incomprehensible. The daily death toll, the fear of infection, and the
   isolation that characterize this moment have left us with an
--
   pandemic, and so its bitterness defines how we feel about it. However,
   as we can see from other examples, these things change as they age.
   Nostalgia teases certain narratives out of history, and nostalgia is
   beholden to the present over and above the past. This may mean that our
   lockdown’s isolation will be underplayed, like segregation in memories
--
   feelings about lockdown—proximity, after all, is not a positive thing
   in and of itself—but rather that we may come to ascribe an important
   value to these experiences. It is because nostalgia trades in the
   communal and the narrative that this is possible. The question is not
   so much, “Will we feel nostalgia for 2020?” as, “What will shape the
   nostalgia of the future?” What new factors will inform the way we feel
   about turning to the past?

   Some may dislike this nostalgic habit, sensing an arbitrariness to the
   stories it tells. But does nostalgia’s reshaping of the past really
   represent a disconnect with history? Not necessarily. Nostalgia does
   not show that “real” history is different because it is neutral;
   rather, it illustrates that no past is neutral, that nostalgia and
   history alike must be taken seriously. We must embrace the fact that
   our memory is informed by what we care about in the present. As we
--

   Elijah Teitelbaum is a researcher at the University of Cambridge. His
   work focuses on connections between nostalgia and visual culture, and
   especially how American Jewish communities perceive and represent their
   histories.
--

   Tags: 2020 art history COVID-19 Elijah Teitelbaum history lockdown
   pandemic past Will We Feel Nostalgia for 2020

Related Visual Art
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-45">
<text>
   Behavior

Why Nostalgia Is Good for You

   The bittersweet emotion increases feelings of vitality
--
     * Print

   Why Nostalgia Is Good for You
   Credit: BRIAN STAUFFER
   Advertisement
--
   childhood spent singing carols or meals spent with now departed loved
   ones. Recently scientists have explored the bittersweet feeling of
   nostalgia, finding that it serves a positive function, improving mood
   and possibly mental health. A new paper illuminates why it works,
   finding that this sepia-toned sentiment does not cement us in the past
--
   in England and the primary author of the paper, which was recently
   published in Emotion, had shown this effect in a 2015 paper. But here
   they found that nostalgia boosted self-continuity by increasing a sense
   of social connectedness. Sentimental recollections often include loved
   ones, which can remind us of a social web that extends across
--

   Tim Wildschut, one of Sedikides's Southampton collaborators on the
   paper, notes there are many ways people elicit nostalgia—looking at
   photographs, cooking certain meals, sharing stories or playing music.
   He calls the feeling, which we naturally experience several times a
--

   This article was originally published with the title "Embrace the
   Nostalgia" in SA Mind 27, 6, 8-9 (November 2016)

   doi:10.1038/scientificamericanmind1116-8b
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-46">
<text>
   (BUTTON)

The Benefits of Nostalgia

   Medically reviewed by Scientific Advisory Board — By John DiPrete on
   September 16, 2018

   If unpleasant or obsessional, past memories can hurt — but nostalgia is
   good for you. The benefits of this internal psychological state are
   touted in various academic studies exploring the art and practice of
--
   lend a gratifying sense of continuity in our lives.

   Nostalgia can take on many different forms. Watching an old
   black-and-white movie can trigger a cultural nostalgia for a lost
   period in time. Often that longing can predate one’s own date of birth:
   fondness for a time only your parents may have known and talked about.
--
   The mental journey back through time adds a fourth dimension to the
   present. If mindfulness is the focal point of the Eternal Now,
   nostalgia forms a special continuum to the timeless past, expanding our
   concept of the self. The future may be vague, inchoate and
   unpredictable; but the past represents a finished whole that cannot be
   harmed or tampered with.

   Documented reasons why nostalgia (when used intelligently) can be good
   for us:

--
   as telling stories and sharing wisdom from a bygone time.

   According to Dena Kemmet, “an additional function of nostalgia may be
   its motivating potential. Nostalgia may boost optimism, spark
   inspiration, and foster creativity.”

   According to Dr. Clay Routledge, Social Psychologist and Associate
   Professor of Psychology at North Dakota State University,nostalgia
   “increases positive mood, self-esteem, feelings of social
   connectedness, optimism about the future, and perceptions of meaning in
   life. Furthermore, nostalgia motivates people to focus on cultivating
   meaningful relationships and pursue important life goals. In addition,
   as people get older, nostalgia makes them feel youthful and energetic.
   Nostalgia also reduces existential fears about death.”

   The emotion of nostalgia can be evoked from a familiar scent, an old
   photograph, or a cherished song. Often it occurs during periods of
   sadness or transition, but it can appear anytime — affecting the young
--
   and more adaptable to life‘s vicissitudes.

   The healthy use of nostalgia is not about retreating into the past. On
   the contrary, exploring the treasures of our “mental” time capsules can
   propel us toward the future, with a restored sense of enthusiasm and
--
   correlated with increased resilience and self-confidence.

   For some, nostalgia can come to resemble a spiritual meditation.
   Indeed, the past is more venerated in places where the future is more
   fleeting — where constant change is often expected and demanded. The
--
   turmoil.

   The judicious use of nostalgia offers each one of us who feels stranded
   in the present an anchor to the past.
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-47">
<text>
   Collaboration and teams

The Surprising Power of Nostalgia at Work

   It can deepen relationships, foster creativity, and boost a collective
--
   Summary.

   Nostalgia is an important psychological resource that helps individuals
   cope with life’s stressors, build strong relationships, find and
   maintain meaning in life, and become more creative and inspired. By
   understanding how nostalgia works, managers can utilize its power to
   help their organizations thrive. The author presents three reasons to
   do so. First, it brings the social self online by increasing social
--
   strengthening social and group bonds. Second, it can reduce turnover by
   helping work feel meaningful — especially for employees who are burned
   out. Third, because nostalgia makes people feel socially supported,
   energized, and confident, it can help employees feel more creative and
   inspired.
--
   Ler em português

   Many people assume that nostalgia is purely entertainment, a feeling
   individuals enjoy because it takes them back to the more carefree days
   of their youth. Some view it as maladaptive fixation on the past,
   perhaps indicating a fear of change. I’ve heard business analysts and
   leaders argue that, although nostalgia may help some companies sell
   consumers a range of products, it’s ultimately bad for business and the
   economy. They imagine that by keeping people focused on the past,
   nostalgia undermines innovation, creativity, and ultimately progress.

   From that perspective, there’s little reason for managers to view
   nostalgia as having value within their organizations. However, a
   growing body of research reveals that it’s an important psychological
   resource that helps individuals cope with life’s stressors, build
   strong relationships, find and maintain meaning in life, and become
   more creative and inspired. I’ve been conducting research on the
   psychology of nostalgia for almost 20 years. Based on what I’ve
   learned, I believe managers can use the power of nostalgia to help
   their organizations thrive.

Nostalgia Is a Psychological Resource

   First, managers need to understand how nostalgia actually works. When
   people engage in nostalgia, they’re accessing personally meaningful
   autobiographical events typically shared with family, friends, and
   other close connections. It isn’t just a happy trip down memory lane —
--
   in which negative feelings such as longing and loss give way to
   positive feelings such as happiness, social connectedness, gratitude,
   and hope. In other words, nostalgia is bittersweet, but more sweet than
   bitter.

   Nostalgia can be triggered by explicit reminders of the past, such as
   running into an old friend or hearing music from one’s youth, but
   people also often become nostalgic when they’re feeling down or
   distressed in some way. Common psychological triggers of nostalgia
   include feelings of sadness, loneliness, meaninglessness, uncertainty,
   and boredom.

   These negative psychological states increase nostalgia because
   nostalgia is restorative. After conducting dozens of studies using
   diverse methods ranging from qualitative text analysis, self-report
   surveys, and behavioral and neuroscientific experiments, my colleagues
   and I have concluded that nostalgia is best described as a
   self-regulatory existential resource that people naturally and
   frequently use to navigate stress and uncertainty and find the
   motivation needed to move forward with purpose and focus. The impact of
   nostalgia on meaning is particularly important because meaning in life
   has great motivational power. Research finds that nostalgia motivates
   the pursuit of important life goals by increasing that sense of
   meaning.
--
   Humans are an existential species. To flourish, we need to make
   meaningful social connections and feel like we’re contributing to the
   world in a way that matters. Nostalgia serves these existential
   endeavors. Here are three reasons for managers to bring this adaptive
   feature of human psychology into their organizations — and ways to do
   it.

1. Nostalgia can help build strong relationships and teams

   Social bonds are a central feature of nostalgia. Most nostalgic
   memories involve other people, and when individuals reflect on these
   memories, they feel more socially connected and supported. Managers can
   take advantage of nostalgia’s social nature to promote strong
   relationships and teams. Encouraging employees to share nostalgic
   stories with team members may help them build deeper connections
   because nostalgia orients people toward social goals. For example, in
   one set of studies my colleagues and I conducted, we found that having
   research participants spend a few minutes reflecting on a nostalgic
--

   We also observed that when people are experiencing higher levels of
   nostalgia, they’re more interested in working on tasks with others, and
   nostalgia has been shown to increase empathy for others and prosocial
   behavior in the forms of volunteering and charitable donations.
   Research also finds that, when people are part of a group, nostalgia
   for an event shared within it makes people more committed to the group.

   Nostalgia brings the social self online. It increases social agency and
   directs that agency toward helping others and strengthening social and
   group bonds. Given the importance of positive relationships and
   effective teams for both the health of individual employees and the
   organization, managers should explore ways to incorporate nostalgia
   into team-building activities, as well as social events like workplace
   celebrations and retreats. For example, create a retro music playlist
   by asking employees to submit nostalgia-themed song requests. This will
   give employees of different ages and with different experiences the
   opportunity to revisit their own nostalgic memories, which energizes
   the desire to connect with others. It will also inspire them to share
   these memories with others, which helps build deeper connections and
   increase nostalgia in others. Indeed, research finds that exposure to
   other people’s nostalgic memories increases one’s own nostalgia and all
   the associated psychological benefits — in other words, nostalgia is
   contagious.

2. Nostalgia can help make work feel meaningful and reduce turnover

   As an existential resource, nostalgia helps people maintain and enhance
   meaning in the present — when they reflect on past meaningful
   experiences, they become motivated to prioritize meaning in the
--
   those experiencing burnout. A series of studies found that when workers
   were prompted to reflect on experiences within their organization that
   made them nostalgic (organizational nostalgia), they subsequently
   reported a greater sense of meaning at work and lower turnover
   intentions. These effects were most pronounced among employees
--
   which can provide guidance for how to restore meaning at work in the
   present. Developing organizational social rituals and traditions can
   help create organizational nostalgia in the first place — it’s an
   investment in the future. For example, organizations could hold monthly
   game nights, potluck dinners, movie screenings, book clubs, or other
--
   organization is undergoing major changes that cause anxiety,
   interpersonal conflict, or other negative experiences, organizational
   nostalgia may prove to be a vital resource.

3. Nostalgia can help organizations be more creative and inspired

   Managers looking to cultivate outside-the-box thinking can also take
   advantage of nostalgia. A workplace that encourages employees to both
   share nostalgic memories and make new ones with their coworkers primes
   the pump of creativity. People are more likely to feel comfortable
   taking risks and exploring new ideas when they feel socially supported,
   energized, and confident. Nostalgia generates these states and can thus
   offer a way to orient employees toward creative thinking and
   problem-solving.
--
   open-minded and creative, and critically, made them produce more
   creative content (as judged by independent evaluators). In addition,
   our research shows that nostalgia makes people feel more inspired.

   While on the subject of creativity, it’s worth noting that there is no
   single right way of inducing nostalgia. Our studies as well as those
   conducted by other research teams have utilized diverse nostalgia
   prompts, such as having people write about a nostalgic memory, read
   accounts of other people’s nostalgic memories, read song lyrics that
   make them nostalgic, listen to nostalgic music, watch nostalgic music
   videos, look at old photographs, visit nostalgia-themed websites,
   create scrapbooks, and engage in activities using augmented reality
   technology.

   Managers should look for opportunities to introduce nostalgia in ways
   they believe will best fit their organizational environment and
   culture. What’s most important is that managers appreciate that
   meaningfully connecting the present to the past via nostalgia can help
   them and their employees have the mindset and motivation needed to
   productively work toward future-oriented individual and organizational
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-48">
<text>
   #Thriveworks » Restorative vs. reflective nostalgia: Learn to spot the
   differences and combat memory distortions Comments Feed alternate
   alternate alternate
--
   [home-icon.png] Learn Coping Skills, Mental Health Topics

Restorative vs. reflective nostalgia: Learn to spot the differences and
combat memory distortions

--
   [gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==]
   [arrow-down.png]
     * Nostalgia is a familiar feeling, but there are actually two
       different types—reflective and restorative nostalgia.
     * Restorative nostalgia involves happy memories and associations with
       the past. When we feel restoratively nostalgic, we’re likely to
       feel motivated to seek out new and rewarding experiences.
     * Conversely, reflective nostalgia may often make us feel gloomy and
       disappointed, making it seem that the present moment doesn’t
       compare with our memories, preventing us from moving forward and
       making new positive experiences.
     * Though they might sound like polar opposites, both types of
       nostalgia can be empowering experiences, if we learn to harness
       their emotional power.
     * Feeling reflectively nostalgic can be counteracted by remembering
--
   days gone by has a bittersweet quality, one that can be difficult to
   express. We’ve all felt nostalgic, but we may not be as familiar with
   the two types of nostalgia: restorative and reflective. While
   restorative nostalgia makes us feel positive about our past and
   motivates us to seek out new possibilities and experiences, reflective
   nostalgia often leaves us upset and wistful, thinking that our best
   days are behind us.

--
   that our brains are rewarding or even bribing us into seeking out
   positive experiences in order to keep the good vibes flowing. In
   contrast, feelings of reflective nostalgia cause us to shut ourselves
   off to new possibilities; in this state of mind, we might actually be
   susceptible to developing depression or anxiety. Despite the
   drastically different ways that restorative and reflective nostalgia
   affect us, psychologists now know that our ability to recall past
   events isn’t very accurate. Most memories, good or bad (and especially
--
   white-and-green-wooden-house-miniature

Reflective vs. Restorative Nostalgia

   Reflective nostalgia was first described in the 17th century when Swiss
   physician Dr. Johannes Hofer noted that soldiers who were stationed
   abroad would often long for their home country, experiencing a
--
   effect of their memories could not be mistaken.

   When the past is viewed through the lens of reflective nostalgia, we’re
   typically closed off to the possibility of change and are reflecting
   back on old memories in order to seek refuge. We don’t see potential in
--

   Regardless of whether you’re experiencing reflective or restorative
   nostalgia, it’s important to recognize and harness the emotional power
   of these unique psychological experiences. You can clear the haze
   associated with memory distortions from your train of thought by taking
--
       encounter at least some resistance in our efforts.

   Unlike restorative nostalgia, sensations of reflective nostalgia aren’t
   pleasant. Evaluate whether your negative emotions could be attached to
   an underlying mental health condition. Reflecting too long on adversity
--
How to Harness Restorative Nostalgic Memories

   When you feel the rush of restorative nostalgia, try to:
     * Soak it all in, but don’t dwell in the past for too long. If you’re
       thinking about lost friends, an old relationship, or a breakthrough
--
     Mental Health Topics

     Restorative vs. reflective nostalgia: Learn to spot the differences
   and combat memory distortions
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-49">
<text>
   Technology

How the Internet Uses Nostalgia

   Long-lost memories pop up in music recommendations, personality
--
   House are selling Greek yogurt. Boyz II Men recently made a cameo on
   How I Met Your Mother. This year's Super Bowl featured, of all people,
   Flea. We are having a moment of '90s nostalgia, occasioned in part by
   millennials (or The Youths or Those Kids or whatever you want to call
   them) who are aging into adulthood and therefore eager to relive their
--
   ***

   Nostalgia, the copious literature on it suggests, comes in two basic
   forms. One is organic, the kind that washes over you when you see an
   old picture of yourself and your cousins, aged 7 and 9 and 10, giggling
--
   Dawson’s Creek's Joey and/or Blossom's Joey, appropriated to arouse a
   vague sense that we have lost something as we’ve moved, inexorably,
   into our future. This form of nostalgia is usually invoked, in one way
   or another, to sell us stuff. You could, because of that, dismiss its
   validity (fauxstalgia?). But it will live on, inevitably, because media
   producers know exactly what advertisers have long understood: that
   nostalgia, like sex, sells.

   The products of that basic insight, whether they're movies or TV shows
--
   Lebowski.

   Nostalgia, under the stewardship of the Internet, has been made nimble.

   As market goods, however, these products can also be recursive: Mad Men
--

   While, sure, commercial culture is commercial, it’s also notable how
   ambient nostalgia has become. The memorial-industrial complex ensures
   that our past—our collective past—permeates our present. That complex
   markets directly to memories that are shared, across generations and
--
   to realize the vague-but-also-urgent goal shared by many social
   networks and services: user engagement. "For almost everyone,” Sung
   says, a nostalgia-focused Spotify story “usually triggers some sort of
   strong emotion. Sometimes it's, 'Wow, I totally forgot that song.
   Thanks so much for reminding me of it.' Other times, it's more like,
--
   Either way, though: engagement. And an experience of the past that is
   customized—if not to a person, individually, then to that person's
   generational demographic. Spotify’s interpretation of nostalgia, in
   that sense, is pretty much the opposite of The LEGO® Movie’s or Mad
   Men's or that of Kraft-by-way-of-the-Ninja Turtles-by-way-of-Vanilla
--
                                     ***

   Spotify isn’t alone in its use of nostalgia as a marketing tool. Social
   networks in general, you could argue, are
   implicitly—preemptively—nostalgic, combining our pasts and our
--

   Networks, however, are also experimenting with more explicit forms of
   nostalgia-baiting. Earlier this month, Facebook rolled out “Look Back”
   compilations that collect users’ most-liked photos, statuses, and life
   events into an easily viewable video. (These collections come in
--

   Even Pinterest, which is most commonly associated with future-oriented
   and aspirational image-collecting, makes use of customized nostalgia.
   Gabriel Trionfi, Pinterest's user experience researcher, is a
   psychologist by training, and he points out that the flip side of
   anticipation—one of the emotions Pinterest uses to generation its own
   version of user engagement—is, yep, nostalgia.

   Journalists have long recognized the same thing advertisers have, which
   is that nostalgia is an extremely efficient tool for selling stuff.

   “Nostalgia is a known way to boost people's mood,” Trionfi told me. It
   allows people to live (and re-live) “something familiar, something they
   remember, a positive emotional experience.” On Pinterest, he points
--
   past.

   Nostalgia, at its most basic level, requires access to memories—and
   there is, of course, no better archive than the Internet. The social
   networks that are becoming increasingly synonymous with our experience
--

   The good feeling is growing. Many media outlets ("content producers,"
   you could call them) are selling nostalgia in one form or another:
   There’s Retronaut and @historyinpix and the many similar—and
   controversial—features dedicated to the resurfacing of the past.
   There’s New York magazine’s late, great “Nostalgia Face-Check” series.
   Yesterday, Wired—known mostly for its reporting on the future—published
   a list, curated by Questlove, of the top hip-hop tracks of the ’90s.
--

   This is all fairly unremarkable; journalists have long recognized the
   same thing advertisers have, which is that nostalgia is an extremely
   efficient tool for selling stuff. But media outlets—especially the ones
   that are merging technological prowess with journalistic—aren’t just
   leveraging our soft enthusiasms for the past; they’re also taking a
   platform-focused approach to that work. They, like the social networks,
   are trafficking in targeted nostalgia.

   Take Buzzfeed’s ever-more-ubiquitous quizzes. “Which ‘90s Movie
--
   people who fit those demographics.

   The upshot of all this? Nostalgia no longer comes in one-size-fits-all,
   and that size is no longer “large.” Nostalgia, under the stewardship of
   the Internet, has been made nimble. Our tenuous relationship with the
   past can now be customized and made relevant, in the manner of a
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-4">
<text>
   Search the Site ____________________ (BUTTON) Search

   Nostalgia

     * What is Nostalgia...
     * Collaborators
     * Publications
     * Media coverage
     * Southampton Nostalgia Scale
     * Grant support
     * Research Participation
--

   Home>gt;
   Nostalgia
   What is Nostalgia...
   >gt;

What Nostalgia Is and What It Does

   Hepper, Ritchie, Sedikides, and Wildschut (2012, Emotion) describe
   nostalgia as a complex emotion that involves past-oriented cognition
   and a mixed affective signature. The emotion is often triggered by
   encountering a familiar smell, sound, or keepsake, by engaging in
--
   an overall sense of bittersweetness.

   Nostalgia confers psychological benefits. When engaging in nostalgic
   reflection, people report a stronger sense of belongingness,
   affiliation, or sociality; they convey higher continuity between their
--
   vicissitudes of life.

Why Does Nostalgia Feel So Nice?

   "The holidays have a way of bringing up fond memories that can warm
   your heart. But are there any actual health benefits to nostalgia? It's
   more than just a longing for the past, and as Anthony and Laci explain,
   these sentiments can be quite good for us. "
--
   Video link to:

    Why Does Nostalgia Feel So Nice?

   Privacy Settings
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-5">
<text>
          + Future-Oriented Social Cognition
          + The Motivated Brain
          + The Need For An Interpersonal Approach: Shared Nostalgia
          + Drawing From The Past For The Future
          + Author Contributions
--
   https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01133

Is Nostalgia a Past or Future-Oriented Experience? Affective, Behavioral,
Social Cognitive, and Neuroscientific Evidence

--
       United States

   Nostalgia, a sentimental longing for the past, is a common, universal,
   and highly social emotional experience. Nostalgic reverie is centered
   around the self, important social connections, and personally
--
   words, when people bring to mind memories that make them nostalgic,
   they are revisiting personally meaningful life events shared with loved
   ones. A growing body of research positions nostalgia as a psychological
   resource with self-regulatory implications. Negative affective states
   such as sadness, loneliness, and meaninglessness trigger nostalgia and
   nostalgia, in turn, enhances well-being, feelings of social
   connectedness, and perceptions of meaning in life (e.g., Routledge et
   al., 2013). Building on the behavioral inhibition (BIS/avoidance
   motivation) and behavioral activation (BAS/approach motivation)
   regulatory model Carver and White (1994), research also indicates that
   the activation of avoidance motivation increases nostalgia, which then
   activates approach motivation (Stephan et al., 2014). In the present
   analysis, we draw on the current state of the science to propose that
   nostalgia is ultimately a future-oriented emotional experience.
   Nostalgia involves reflecting on past experiences but it motivates
   affective states, behaviors, and goals that improve people's future
   lives. In the following sections, we briefly review relevant evidence
   across affective, behavioral, social cognitive, and neuroscientific
   indicators and close by considering the need for future research
   focused on nostalgia as a shared experience.

Future-Oriented Affect

   Nostalgia increases general well-being (Routledge et al., 2013) but
   also positively impacts motivation-relevant affect. For instance,
   nostalgia increases optimism (Cheung et al., 2013, 2016) inspiration
   (Stephan et al., 2015) social efficacy (Abeyta et al., 2015) and
   feelings of purpose in life (Routledge et al., 2011). In addition, as
   people get older, nostalgia makes them feel youthful and more
   optimistic about their health (Abeyta and Routledge, 2016). People's
   written accounts of nostalgic memories also frequently contain themes
   of appreciation for both the past and hopefulness for the future
   (Routledge, 2015). In short, nostalgia promotes the types of affective
   states that mobilize the self for action.

Future-Oriented Behavior

   Critically, nostalgia-induced affective states promote relevant
   behavior. For instance, health optimism triggered by nostalgia is
   associated with increased intentions to exercise and eat well, as well
   as subsequent levels of physical activity (Kersten et al., 2016).
   Similarly, the social efficacy nostalgia engenders leads to increased
   social engagement (Abeyta et al., 2015). More broadly, when people
   experience nostalgia, they are subsequently more likely to engage in
   prosocial behavior (Stephan et al., 2014), including charitable giving
   (Zhou et al., 2012). Nostalgia doesn't just make people feel inspired.
   It drives them to act on their inspiration.

Future-Oriented Social Cognition

   Arguably, the most compelling evidence that nostalgia is a
   future-oriented emotional experience is its effects on goal-related
   cognition, since goals are about the future. Nostalgia increases the
   importance people assign to relationship goals, intentions to pursue
   the goal of connecting with friends, and the desire to resolve a
   relationship problem (Abeyta et al., 2015). More broadly, nostalgia
   increases the motivation to pursue one's most important goal (Sedikides
   et al., 2017).

   Given the social nature of nostalgia, its impact on goals may be
   strongest in the interpersonal domain. Relatedly, nostalgia's impact on
   social motivation is moderated by individual differences in
   attachment-related avoidance (Abeyta et al., 2019). For individuals who
   rely on relationships for psychological comfort (low attachment-related
   avoidance), nostalgia increases social goal pursuit. For those who do
   not rely on relationships for comfort (high attachment-related
   avoidance), nostalgia decreases social goal pursuit. In sum, nostalgia
   mobilizes the self, particularly the social self.

The Motivated Brain

   The neuroscience of nostalgia remains limited. Nostalgia proneness is
   positively related to right-frontal electroencephalogram (EEG)
   asymmetry, an indicator avoidance motivation and negative emotions
--
   thus, we cannot determine causality from it, this finding is in line
   with past research suggesting that negative emotions and experiences,
   such as loneliness and meaninglessness, trigger nostalgia as a
   regulatory resource (e.g., Routledge et al., 2013). More recently,
   Bocincova et al. (2019) found that nostalgia reduced error related
   negativity (ERN; a neurological indicator of avoidance motivation) in
   response to making a mistake in a modified Flanker task, which is
   consistent with research indicating that nostalgia orients people away
   from avoidant and toward approach-related psychological states (Stephan
   et al., 2014). Notably, a preregistered follow-up study did not
   replicate these findings (FioRito et al., 2020). Further research is
   required to examine if, and how, nostalgia affects motivation as
   measured using social neuroscientific paradigms.

The Need For An Interpersonal Approach: Shared Nostalgia

   Although previous research demonstrates that nostalgia is primarily
   focused on social relationships, almost no work has explored how
   nostalgia occurs in a social setting. Nostalgia likely frequently
   implicates social interaction. Indeed, up to 75 percent of
   conversations may include nostalgic content (Pasupathi et al., 2002;
   Fivush, 2008; Baron and Bluck, 2009; Beike et al., 2016). Therefore,
   future research should explore nostalgia as a shared experience. We
   define shared nostalgia as nostalgia transmitted to at least one other
   person or exchanged between two or more people. The nature of shared
   nostalgia needs to be determined. How often does this occur? With whom?
   What is the role of approach motivation in sharing nostalgic memories
   with and between others? What social and emotional benefits, if any,
   can be gained?

   We posit that individuals share nostalgia for two purposes: to create
   and to maintain social connections. The future-oriented qualities of
   nostalgia may prompt an individual to share a nostalgic memory with an
   acquaintance to build closeness. Alternatively, those who discuss
   nostalgic memories with others may “bring online” a social approach
--
Drawing From The Past For The Future

   By definition, nostalgia is a past-focused affective experience. A
   growing body of evidence, however, documents the future-oriented nature
   of nostalgia. Specifically, people can reference their nostalgic past
   to remind themselves what it felt to be young (Abeyta and Routledge,
   2016) and loved (e.g., Cheung et al., 2013), which, in turn, promotes
--
   2015), and pursuing goals (e.g., Sedikides et al., 2017). There are
   deviations from this process, however. For instance, Cheung et al.
   (2019) recently introduced the concept of anticipated nostalgia. This
   construct is unique in that it does not rely on the reflections of the
   past. Instead, anticipated nostalgia is nostalgia for the present and
   the future (e.g., “I anticipate I will feel nostalgic about my
   children's childhood in the future”). Critically, Cheung et al. (2019)
   found that anticipated nostalgia is related to deliberate savoring
   techniques, such as purchasing souvenirs and documenting moments with
   pictures. Thus, anticipated nostalgia could be considered a
   future-focused experience that promotes future-oriented behavior. When
   discussing the future-oriented nature of nostalgia, individual
   differences should be considered, as well; not everyone benefits from
   using nostalgia (e.g., attachment-related avoidance; Wildschut et al.,
   2010; Juhl et al., 2012; Abeyta et al., 2019). Future research should
   examine other instances in which nostalgia does not result in
   future-oriented behavior.

--
   Abeyta, A. A., Nelson, T. A., and Routledge, C. (2019). The pushes and
   pulls of the past: The effects of attachment-related avoidance and
   nostalgia on approach-oriented social goals. Personal. Indiv. Diff.
   149, 200–208. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2019.06.008

--

   Abeyta, A. A., and Routledge, C. (2016). Fountain of youth: the impact
   of nostalgia on youthfulness and implications for health. Self Identity
   15, 356–369. doi: 10.1080/15298868.2015.1133452

--

   Abeyta, A. A., Routledge, C., and Juhl, J. (2015). Looking back to move
   forward: nostalgia as a psychological resource for promoting
   relationship goals and overcoming relationship challenges. J. Personal.
   Soc. Psychol. 109, 1029–1044. doi: 10.1037/pspi0000036
--

   Bocincova, A., Nelson, T. A., Johnson, J. S., and Routledge, C. (2019).
   Experimentally induced nostalgia reduces the amplitude of the
   event-related negativity. Soc. Neurosci. 14, 631–634. doi:
   10.1080/17470919.2019.1580612
--

   Cheung, W.-Y., Sedikides, C., and Wildschut, T. (2016). Induced
   nostalgia increases optimism (via social-connectedness and self-esteem)
   among individuals high, but not low, in trait nostalgia. Personal.
   Individual Diff. 90, 283–288. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2015.11.028

--

   Cheung, W.-Y., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Hepper, E. G., Arndt, J.,
   and Vingerhoets, A. J. (2013). Back to the future: nostalgia increases
   optimism. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 39, 1484–1496. doi:
   10.1177/0146167213499187
--

   Cheung, W. Y., Hepper, E. G., Reid, C. A., Green, J. D., Wildschut, T.,
   and Sedikides, C. (2019). Anticipated nostalgia: looking forward to
   looking back. Cognition Emotion 2, 1–15. doi:
   10.1080/02699931.2019.1649247
--

   FioRito, T., Bocincova, A., Johnson, J. S., and Routledge, C. (2020). A
   Follow-Up Examination of Experimentally Induced Nostalgia Reducing ERN.
   Retrieved from: osf.io/6c3uz

--

   Juhl, J., Sand, E. C., and Routledge, C. (2012). The effects of
   nostalgia and avoidant attachment on relationship satisfaction and
   romantic motives. J. Soc. Personal Relationships 29, 661–670. doi:
   10.1177/0265407512443433
--

   Kersten, M., Cox, C. R., and Enkevort, E. A. V. (2016). An exercise in
   nostalgia: nostalgia promotes health optimism and physical activity.
   Psychol. Health 31, 1166–1181. doi: 10.1080/08870446.2016.1185524

--
   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Routledge, C. (2015). Nostalgia: A Psychological Resource. New York,
   NY: Routledge and Taylor and Francis Group.

--
   Routledge, C., Arndt, J., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Hart, C. M.,
   Juhl, J., et al. (2011). The past makes the present meaningful:
   Nostalgia as an existential resource. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 101,
   638–652. doi: 10.1037/a0024292

--

   Routledge, C., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., and Juhl, J. (2013).
   Nostalgia as a resource for psychological health and well-being. Soc.
   Personal. Psychol. Compass 7, 808–818. doi: 10.1111/spc3.12070

--

   Sedikides, C., Cheung, W.-Y., Wildschut, T., Hepper, E. G., Baldursson,
   E., and Pedersen, B. (2017). Nostalgia motivates pursuit of important
   goals by increasing meaning in life. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 48, 209–216.
   doi: 10.1002/ejsp.2318
--

   Stephan, E., Sedikides, C., Wildschut, T., Cheung, W.-Y., Routledge,
   C., and Arndt, J. (2015). Nostalgia-evoked inspiration. Personal. Soc.
   Psychol. Bull. 41, 1395–1410. doi: 10.1177/0146167215596985

--

   Stephan, E., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Zhou, X., He, W., Routledge,
   C., et al. (2014). The mnemonic mover: Nostalgia regulates avoidance
   and approach motivation. Emotion 14, 545–561. doi: 10.1037/a0035673

--
   Tullett, A. M., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., and Inzlicht, M. (2015).
   Right-frontal cortical asymmetry predicts increased proneness to
   nostalgia. Psychophysiology 52, 990–996. doi: 10.1111/psyp.12438

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Routledge, C., Arndt, J., and Cordaro, F.
   (2010). Nostalgia as a repository of social connectedness: the role of
   attachment-related avoidance. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 98, 573–586.
   doi: 10.1037/a0017597
--

   Zhou, X., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Shi, K., and Feng, C. (2012).
   Nostalgia: the gift that keeps on giving. J. Consumer Res. 39, 39–50.
   doi: 10.1086/662199

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Keywords: nostalgia, shared nostalgia, motivation, self-regulation,
   social cognition

   Citation: FioRito TA and Routledge C (2020) Is Nostalgia a Past or
   Future-Oriented Experience? Affective, Behavioral, Social Cognitive,
   and Neuroscientific Evidence. Front. Psychol. 11:1133. doi:
--
This article is part of the Research Topic

   Current Issues in Nostalgia Research
   View all 13 Articles
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-6">
<text>
   Emotional Health

5 Ways Nostalgia Is Good for Your Health (and When It's Not)

   Fleeting memories from your past don’t just bring on warm and fuzzy
--
   It’s common to sometimes find yourself longing for the past — to think
   back on your childhood or early adulthood and wistfully recall memories
   that leave you feeling warm and fuzzy. That’s called nostalgia.

   “It’s the positive, wistful, or longing sentiment that one experiences
--
   Woodhouse, a licensed marriage and family therapist and director of
   clinical operations at Los Angeles–based Lightfully Behavioral Health.
   Nostalgia could come about by looking at an old photograph, talking
   with a friend, or smelling a familiar scent.

--
   scholar in the department of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at the
   University of California San Francisco School of Medicine, who studies
   nostalgia.

   It comes up clinically as well. “Sometimes when a client needs a
   grounding point, we will discuss things they look back upon fondly and
   draw upon the nostalgia experience,” Woodhouse says. “Nostalgia can be
   beneficial when dealing with dark times and reminding clients there was
   once light.”
--
   and Social Psychology, researchers (including Dr. Newman) concluded
   that thinking back on your memories is primarily a positive experience,
   and that nostalgia, practicing nostalgia, or the act of feeling
   nostalgic was more commonly linked to positive markers of health (like
   meaning in life, self-esteem, and optimism) than negative ones. But the
--
   have positive effects on people.

   Here are five benefits linked to nostalgia:

1. It May Promote Sense of Self
--
2. It Can Serve as a Barometer for Personal Growth

   Nostalgia can also show you how far you’ve come. “Change doesn’t happen
   overnight,” Woodhouse says. “When we can draw upon those positive
   experiences and reflect upon our own growth, nostalgia can be a good
   barometer to gauge how we have stayed aligned with our own values
   (which may change over time, and that's okay) and our authentic
--
3. It May Boost Mood

   Nostalgia can lead to a positive affect, according to a study published
   April 2021 in Consciousness and Cognition. If you’re feeling bogged
   down by negativity, dipping into nostalgic feelings could help
--
   satisfied you felt eating your grandma’s famous cherry pie as a kid.

   In fact, research suggests that feelings of nostalgia increased during
   COVID-19 quarantines, serving as a comfort during isolating times,
   according to a review article published in 2021 in the Journal of
--

   According to a study published in April 2021 in the journal Emotion,
   nostalgia is a highly social emotion that connects us to others. Based
   on a series of five experiments, the researchers concluded that
   nostalgia can be used as a way to facilitate "help seeking behavior" by
   fostering social connectedness.

--
   connecting over shared experiences from the past, such as Millennials
   relating over '90s cartoons and dial-up connections, Woodhouse says.
   "Nostalgia can unify our experiences."

5. It Could Make You More Optimistic

   The aforementioned February 2020 paper from the Journal of Personality
   and Social Psychology noted that nostalgia can increase optimism. This
   is rooted in the fact that, oftentimes, reminiscing about fond memories
   brings us back to happy times. “When we remember good times or
--
   says.

The Potential Downside of Nostalgia

   Most of the time when someone talks about nostalgia, they’re referring
   to personal nostalgia, or longing for moments they’ve experienced in
   their own life. As mentioned, this experience is generally positive,
   but it can bring on sadness, too.

   Newman calls it a mixed emotion. Anticipatory nostalgia, for instance,
   which is missing the present while you’re still living it, can result
   in sadness, according to a study published May 2020 in Frontiers in
   Psychology. Anticipatory nostalgia is defined in the paper as the
   “premature missing of what is still present” and “future loss.”

   Nostalgia can also induce sadness if you’re yearning for the past, and
   upset that the times you’re thinking of no longer exist. “When you long
   for a time in your past, it can make you miss that time,” Newman says.
--
   ‘what ifs’ and ‘should haves,’ which can lead to depression,” she says.

   Whether the experience of nostalgia will be positive or negative can
   depend on how it’s introduced. The same 2020 study published in the
   Journal of Personality and Social Psychology that suggested nostalgia
   can boost optimism also found that it is more closely linked with
   sadness if the nostalgia was unprompted and came up organically during
   the day. But it’s more positive if you’re specifically asked to
   reminisce.

   In addition to personal nostalgia, there’s historical or collective
   nostalgia, which is a longing for a time in history that you did not
   personally experience, according to the American Psychological
   Association.
--
   though you never lived during that time,” Newman says.

   Historical nostalgia can be dangerous, however, if someone in power
   uses it to push society back toward negative concepts and practices,
   such as racism or discrimination. Newman adds that there can also be a
   positive side to historical nostalgia in that it can lead to a greater
   sense of connectedness. “So there could be some benefits and harmful
   consequences, too,” he says.
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-7">
<text>
   Hide and Seek

The Meaning of Nostalgia

The psychology and philosophy of nostalgia.

   Posted November 27, 2014
--
   Source: Wikicommons

   Nostalgia is sentimentality for the past, typically for a particular
   period or place with positive associations, but sometimes also for the
   past in general, ‘the good old days of yore’.
--
   At the end of André Brink’s novel, An Instant in the Wind, Adam says,
   ‘The land which happened inside us no one can take away from us again,
   not even ourselves.’ Nostalgia combines the sadness of loss with the
   joy or consolation that the loss is not complete, nor ever can be.
   Mortal though we are, whatever little life we have snared from the
   legions of death is forever ours.

   ‘Nostalgia’ is a portmanteau neologism coined in 1688 by Swiss medical
   student Johannes Hofer, from the Greek nóstos [homecoming] and álgos
   [pain, ache]. Nóstos is, of course, the overarching theme of Homer’s
--
     remembered Zion.

   Hofer coined ‘nostalgia’ to refer to the homesickness of Swiss
   mercenaries fighting in foreign lowlands. Military physicians
   attributed this homesickness, also known as Schweizerheimweh or mal du
--
   fever, and even, in extremis, death. In the Dictionnaire de musique,
   Jean-Jacques Rousseau claims that Swiss mercenaries were forbidden from
   singing their Swiss songs so as not to aggravate their nostalgia.

   Today, nostalgia is no longer looked upon as a mental disorder, but as
   a natural, common, and even positive emotion, a vehicle for travelling
   beyond the suffocating confines of time and space. Bouts of nostalgia
   are often prompted by thoughts about the past; particular places and
   objects; feelings of loneliness, disconnectedness, or meaninglessness;
--
   portal, which, for many years, helped me to reminisce about Oscar.

   I say ‘help’ because nostalgia does have an unexpected number of
   adaptive functions. Our everyday is humdrum, often even absurd.
   Nostalgia can lend us much-needed context, perspective, and direction,
   reminding and reassuring us that our life (and that of others) is not
   as banal as it may seem, that it is rooted in a narrative, and that
--
   experiences.

   No surprise, then, that nostalgia is more pronounced in uncertain times
   and times of transition or change. According to one study, it is also
   more common on cold days or in cold rooms, and makes us feel warmer!

   In that much, nostalgia serves a similar function to anticipation,
   which can be defined as enthusiasm and excitement for some expected or
   hoped-for positive event. The hauntings of times gone by, and the
--
   them back to us.

   Nostalgia is nothing if not paradoxical. In supplying us with substance
   and texture, it also reminds us of their lack and, in the reminding,
   moves us to compensation. Unfortunately, this compensation often takes
   the form of spending, and marketers exploit nostalgia to sell us
   everything from music and clothes to cars and houses.

   It could be argued that nostalgia is a form of self-deception in that
   it invariably involves distortion and idealization of the past, not
   least because the bad or boring bits are erased from our memory,
--
   memoria præteritorum bonorum, ‘the past is always well remembered’.

   If overindulged, nostalgia can give rise to a utopia that never existed
   and never can exist, but that is pursued at all costs, sapping all life
   and joy and potential from the present. For many people, paradise is
   not so much a place to go to as the place (they think) they came from.

   Nostalgia can be fruitfully compared with a number of similar or
   related concepts, including saudade, mono no aware, wabi-sabi, and
   Sehnsucht.
--
   JJ Rousseau (1767), Dictionnaire de musique.

   Zhou X et al. (2012): Heartwarming memories: Nostalgia maintains
   physiological comfort. Emotion 12(4):700.
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-8">
<text>
   (BUTTON)

Why do we need nostalgia?

   By Maria Cohut, Ph.D. on January 1, 2021

   Nostalgia and homesickness are part and parcel of the human experience.
   Most of us associate them with feelings of sadness and sometimes loss,
   but do they actually play a positive role in the human psyche? Medical
--
   Share on Pinterestkool99/Getty Images

   The term “nostalgia” originates from Ancient Greek via New Latin, and
   it is a composite of the root words “nostos,” meaning “home,” and
   “algos,” meaning “pain.”

   Essentially, it refers to the pain of being far away from home. The
   first time “nostalgia” came into use was in 17th-century Switzerland,
   when physician Johannes Hofer identified it as a condition specific to
   Swiss mercenary soldiers.

   Hofer identified nostalgia as a disease of the mind, and he described
   its mechanism as below:

     “Nostalgia […] is sympathic of an afflicted imagination. Hence, from
     the living spirits entirely by its own momentum along uncommon
     routes through the untouched courses of the channels of the brain to
--

   Physician J. J. Scheuchzer, who lived and worked around the same time
   as Hofer, had a similar view of nostalgia. However, he argued that it
   was not a result of an internal imbalance of the mind, but a condition
   influenced by external factors.

   According to him, nostalgia was caused by “a sharp differential in
   atmospheric pressure causing excessive body pressurization, which in
   turn drove blood from the heart to the brain, thereby producing the
   observed affliction of sentiment.”

   Nostalgia and homesickness as ‘disorders’

   For many centuries, doctors persisted in understanding nostalgia as a
   state of ill health that required treatment. However, views around its
   mechanisms and typology, as well as around which demographics it
--
   In a paper from 2008, Profs Wildschut, Sedikides, and their colleagues
   note that, throughout the 17th and 18th centuries, doctors thought
   nostalgia only affected the Swiss, since they mostly observed it in the
   Swiss mercenary soldiers that lent their services to foreign armies.

   Prof. Svetlana Boym writes that, at this time, cures for nostalgia
   included “leeches, warm hypnotic emulsions, opium” and returning home,
   to the Alps.
--

   Throughout the 20th century, doctors kept changing their minds about
   the nature of nostalgia, though they mostly associated it with
   homesickness, an unhelpful psychological mechanism experienced by
   students and migrants unable to adapt to a new life away from home.
--
   explain:

     “By the beginning of the 20th century, nostalgia was regarded as a
     psychiatric disorder. Symptoms included anxiety, sadness, and
     insomnia. By the mid-20th century, psychodynamic approaches
     considered nostalgia a subconscious desire to return to an earlier
     life stage, and it was labeled as a repressive compulsive disorder.
     Soon thereafter, nostalgia was downgraded to a variant of
     depression, marked by loss and grief, though still equated with
     homesickness.”

   In their 2006 article, they also point out that, for much of the 20th
   century, some psychologists viewed nostalgia as an “immigrant
   psychosis,” a “mentally repressive compulsive disorder,” or “a
   regressive manifestation closely related to the issue of loss, grief,
--
   According to Profs Wildschut, Sedikides, and their colleagues, in the
   late 20th century, doctors and researchers started to differentiate
   between nostalgia and homesickness.

   They suggest homesickness became conflated with mental health issues,
   such as separation anxiety, whereas nostalgia began to be associated
   with idealized images of childhood or past happy times.

   What are the benefits of nostalgia?

   So is nostalgia — and even homesickness — a sign that a person is
   unable to adapt to a new life, new surroundings, or the realities of
   adult life? Or does it also play a positive role in the human psyche?

   Physicians no longer treat nostalgia as a disorder, but the phenomenon
   continues to interest researchers.

--

   One study, based on the self-reported experiences of the participants,
   indicated that nostalgia is, by and large, “a positively toned and
   self-relevant emotion that is often associated with the recall of
   experiences involving interactions with important others or of
--
     negative to a positive or triumphant life scene.”

   A second study confirmed that nostalgia helps form a constructive
   narrative of meaningful events from the past, but it also identified
   some of the most common triggers of nostalgia.

   According to the researchers, most participants experienced nostalgia
   when faced with difficult life situations, such as present worries and
   anxieties. This suggested that casting their minds back to a happier or
--
   uncertainties.

   “Chief among the perceived benefits of nostalgia were its capacity to
   generate positive affect, bolster social bonds, and increase positive
   self-regard,” Profs Wildschut, Sedikides, and their colleagues write.

   Further research reveals other ways that nostalgia can be beneficial.
   For example, a 2012 paper reports that this mental state can help
   increase a person’s willingness to help others, thanks to the fact that
--

   According to Dr. Krystine Batcho — professor of psychology at LeMoyne
   College in Syracuse, NY — nostalgia also helps strengthen a person’s
   identity, their sense of self.

   In an interview for the American Psychological Association, she asserts
   that “nostalgia is an emotional experience that unifies,” that “helps
   unite our sense of who we are, our self, our identity over time,” and
   “gives us a sense of who we want to be […] in the future.”
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-9">
<text>
   Old school

The power of nostalgia: What science tells us about longing for the past

   “Nostalgia is a resource that people use to move forward.”
   campers in 1930

--
   swimming, water balloon fights, and drinking orange soda. The feeling
   isn’t just one of happy recollection: It’s carried by a strong current
   of wistful longing for a time in the past. It’s nostalgia.

   Nostalgia is powerful: It gets political leaders elected, it’s at the
   core of billions of dollars of advertising, and was once considered a
   medical disease. But what is nostalgia and what makes it so powerful?
   What’s happening in our brains when we’re feeling it and how does it
   influence our lives?

   Researchers are finding that nostalgia can be an enormously beneficial,
   and potentially life-saving emotion. Clay Routledge, a psychological
   scientist, has spent much of his career studying what gives our lives
   meaning and has found that nostalgia plays an important role.

   “Nostalgia is one of the self-regulatory tools we use to remind
   ourselves that we matter,” he tells Inverse.

What is nostalgia?

   “The simplest definition of nostalgia is people’s reflection on their
   cherished memories,” Routledge explains. “That varies from person to
   person, obviously, but there are some commonalities.”
--
   a decade ago.

What nostalgia does to the brain

   A 2016 study used fMRI imaging to monitor participants’ brain activity
   when they were exposed to nostalgia-inducing stimuli. When nostalgia
   was triggered, participants’ brains showed activity in two powerful
   neural networks: the areas of the brain associated with memory and the
--

   The more those systems “worked cooperatively,” the researchers found,
   the more nostalgia people felt.
   camping car
   “Nostalgia is one of the self-regulatory tools we use to remind
   ourselves that we matter.”Shutterstock

   A very specific kind of memory is being activated during nostalgia,
   Routledge says. “Most of the time when you’re nostalgic, it’s
   autobiographical; you’re accessing what we call ‘self-relevant
--
   recollection of the smell is important for survival.

Is nostalgia a positive or negative emotion?

   In the earliest days of nostalgia study, Routledge says, “it was seen
   as simply as homesickness.”

   This is where nostalgia gets its name: the word was coined by a Swiss
   medical student, Johannes Hofer, in his 1688 dissertation. In
   describing the anxieties of soldiers fighting away from home, he
--
   But watch someone find an old-school Gameboy or the opening credits of
   their favorite childhood TV show, and you’ll likely find them smiling.
   While homesickness is pure ache, nostalgia is a unique mix of ache and
   pleasure.

--
   positivity.”

   That positivity is what can make nostalgia such a useful emotion.

Nostalgia as motivation and meaning

   Routledge and his nostalgia-studying colleagues have found that
   nostalgia is actually used to help self-regulate stress signals in the
   brain. Routledge speculates likely what those soldiers were doing when
   Hofer observed them and coined the term.
--
   stress.”

   His own research supports this theory. “We’ve seen that nostalgia seems
   to bring online these motivational, or self-regulatory processes in the
   brain that help us down-regulate or mitigate psychological threats,”
--
   Boardwalk in 1944.Getty/Nextrecord Archives

   Research suggests the social aspect of nostalgia motivates us to engage
   in “prosocial” behavior. Nostalgia makes us realize the importance of
   relationships and, in turn, motivates us to connect with friends and
   pursue romantic relationships.
--
   It’s also strongly associated with optimism and resiliency.

   “Nostalgia is a resource that people use to move forward,” Routledge
   says.

   We saw all of these aspects of nostalgia play out during the pandemic.
   You probably found yourself watching old movies, or listening to old
   music. When we were in lockdown, we all felt nostalgic for the “before
</text>
</page> §
</lang>
