<lang="eng">
<page="eng-10">
<text>
   #alternate

   (BUTTON)

   Old school

The power of nostalgia: What science tells us about longing for the past

   “Nostalgia is a resource that people use to move forward.”
   campers in 1930

   Chris Ware/Keystone/FPG/Getty Images
   Katie MacBride
   July 4, 2021

   Under resplendent Douglas Firs, cedars, and Manzanita trees creeps a
   green shrub with a powerful odor.

   It’s called mountain misery, or Chamaebatia foliolosa. It’s native to
   California. It only grows at elevations between 2,000 and 7,000 feet
   and only on the western side of the Sierra Nevada Mountains — which is
   precisely where I went to summer camp as a kid.

   All I need is a gentle whiff of mountain misery on the warm summer air
   and I am transported back to idyllic summer days filled with lake
   swimming, water balloon fights, and drinking orange soda. The feeling
   isn’t just one of happy recollection: It’s carried by a strong current
   of wistful longing for a time in the past. It’s nostalgia.

   Nostalgia is powerful: It gets political leaders elected, it’s at the
   core of billions of dollars of advertising, and was once considered a
   medical disease. But what is nostalgia and what makes it so powerful?
   What’s happening in our brains when we’re feeling it and how does it
   influence our lives?

   Researchers are finding that nostalgia can be an enormously beneficial,
   and potentially life-saving emotion. Clay Routledge, a psychological
   scientist, has spent much of his career studying what gives our lives
   meaning and has found that nostalgia plays an important role.

   “Nostalgia is one of the self-regulatory tools we use to remind
   ourselves that we matter,” he tells Inverse.

What is nostalgia?

   “The simplest definition of nostalgia is people’s reflection on their
   cherished memories,” Routledge explains. “That varies from person to
   person, obviously, but there are some commonalities.”

   Routledge says nostalgic memories tend to have the following
   characteristics:
     * A social component: Nostalgic memories typically involve family
       members, close friends, or romantic partners.
     * Personal meaning: The memories might seem trivial to someone else,
       but because of the personal context, they’re meaningful.
     * They occurred fairly far in the past.

   In other words, you’re unlikely to feel nostalgic about something that
   happened yesterday, but you likely have a nostalgic memory or two from
   a decade ago.

What nostalgia does to the brain

   A 2016 study used fMRI imaging to monitor participants’ brain activity
   when they were exposed to nostalgia-inducing stimuli. When nostalgia
   was triggered, participants’ brains showed activity in two powerful
   neural networks: the areas of the brain associated with memory and the
   brain’s reward system.

   The more those systems “worked cooperatively,” the researchers found,
   the more nostalgia people felt.
   camping car
   “Nostalgia is one of the self-regulatory tools we use to remind
   ourselves that we matter.”Shutterstock

   A very specific kind of memory is being activated during nostalgia,
   Routledge says. “Most of the time when you’re nostalgic, it’s
   autobiographical; you’re accessing what we call ‘self-relevant
   memories,” he explains.

   Studies have shown that smells, like my trusty mountain misery, can be
   an especially powerful catalyst for nostalgic memories.

   If you’re hiking in the Sierras, you’re smelling fresh air, dirt, and
   too many trees and plants to count. All of those scents are sorted and
   parsed in the body’s olfactory bulb, which extends from your nose to
   the base of your brain. The olfactory bulb is directly connected to the
   amygdala, an area of the brain responsible for processing emotion, and
   the hippocampus, an area of the brain associated with memory.

   Smells from childhood are particularly powerful in this respect because
   very often our first exposure to scents is in childhood. Our brains
   form particularly strong connections during this process in case
   recollection of the smell is important for survival.

Is nostalgia a positive or negative emotion?

   In the earliest days of nostalgia study, Routledge says, “it was seen
   as simply as homesickness.”

   This is where nostalgia gets its name: the word was coined by a Swiss
   medical student, Johannes Hofer, in his 1688 dissertation. In
   describing the anxieties of soldiers fighting away from home, he
   combined the Greek word for homecoming, nostos, with the word for pain,
   algos.

     “There’s a tinge of sadness or loss because you know you can’t have
     that exact thing again.”

   But watch someone find an old-school Gameboy or the opening credits of
   their favorite childhood TV show, and you’ll likely find them smiling.
   While homesickness is pure ache, nostalgia is a unique mix of ache and
   pleasure.

   “We call an emotionally ambivalent motion, which means it has its
   complex right as positive features and negative features,” Routledge
   explains. “There’s a tinge of sadness or loss because you know you
   can’t have that exact thing again, or someone in the memory is no
   longer alive. But that sadness comes with, and is often overwhelmed by
   positivity.”

   That positivity is what can make nostalgia such a useful emotion.

Nostalgia as motivation and meaning

   Routledge and his nostalgia-studying colleagues have found that
   nostalgia is actually used to help self-regulate stress signals in the
   brain. Routledge speculates likely what those soldiers were doing when
   Hofer observed them and coined the term.

   “These soldiers were stressed and homesick and afraid,” he says, “and
   revisiting cherished memories from home was a way to cope with that
   stress.”

   His own research supports this theory. “We’ve seen that nostalgia seems
   to bring online these motivational, or self-regulatory processes in the
   brain that help us down-regulate or mitigate psychological threats,”
   Routledge says.
   post card
   A vintage souvenir postcard shows crowds at Coney Island Beach and
   Boardwalk in 1944.Getty/Nextrecord Archives

   Research suggests the social aspect of nostalgia motivates us to engage
   in “prosocial” behavior. Nostalgia makes us realize the importance of
   relationships and, in turn, motivates us to connect with friends and
   pursue romantic relationships.

   It’s also strongly associated with optimism and resiliency.

   “Nostalgia is a resource that people use to move forward,” Routledge
   says.

   We saw all of these aspects of nostalgia play out during the pandemic.
   You probably found yourself watching old movies, or listening to old
   music. When we were in lockdown, we all felt nostalgic for the “before
   times” when we could see, in person, our family and friends.

   Those feelings were triggered by loneliness and a stressful situation,
   but they were also motivating — propelling us to believe that if we
   could just make it through, the reward of those in-person visits would
   be worth the wait.

   The next time you find yourself daydreaming about that summer you were
   16 or Christmas morning at your grandmother’s house, know that that
   swirling mix of comfort and longing is doing something important: It’s
   helping you understand what you want and motivating you to get there.

   More like this
   Science
   Dec. 4, 2022
   Girl holding paw of a dog
   We need to start treating grieving for our pets seriously — therapists
   can help
   By Tara Yarlagadda
   Mind and Body
   Dec. 14, 2022
   Colorado is the first state to allow psychedelic-assisted therapy; in
   2020 Oregon passed a bill that...
   How Colorado’s radical decriminalization efforts may herald a new era
   for psychedelics
   By Katie MacBride
   Mind and Body
   Dec. 12, 2022
   Microbiome tests claim to provide a detailed view of the microorganisms
   that reside in your gut and ...
   Microbiome home test kits are the wild west of gut health
   By Katie MacBride
   LEARN SOMETHING NEW EVERY DAY.
   ____________________ (BUTTON) Submit
   By subscribing to this BDG newsletter, you agree to our Terms of
   Service and Privacy Policy
   Related Tags
     * Health
     * Psychology
     * Mental Health

   Share:

   [ ]

   [ ] (BUTTON) (BUTTON)
   ____________________
   (BUTTON)
   Reset
   (*)
   Science
   SpaceClimate CrisisNatureAncient HumansSee All
   ( )
   Innovation
   HorizonsTransportationArtificial IntelligenceSee All
   ( )
   Entertainment
   MultiverseReviewsThe MCUSee All
   ( )
   Mind and Body
   Men's HealthLongevity HacksPublic HealthStrategyMental HealthSee All
   ( )
   Gaming
   Video Game ReviewsWalkthroughsOpen WorldSee All
   ( )
   Culture
   Amplifying Our Voices
   Gear
   Inverse Recommends
     * About
     * Masthead
     * Newsletter
     * Terms
     * Topics
     * Privacy
     * Archive
     * DMCA
     * Browse
     * Advertise
     * Ethics
     * Contact

   INVERSE © 2022 BDG Media, Inc. All rights reserved.

   [p-xPmcrFNGfHkBg.gif]
   [p?c1=2&amp;amp;c2=17519299&amp;amp;cs_ucfr=0&amp;amp;cv=2.0&amp;amp;cj=1]
   [tr?id=1636673763227734&amp;amp;ev=PageView&amp;amp;noscript=1]
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-11">
<text>
   #alternate

   [p?c1=2&amp;c2=22434406&amp;cv=2.0&amp;cj=1]

   Open side menu button
   Skip to content
     * News
     * Health
     * Smarter Living
     * Entertainment
     * Relationships
     * Travel
     * Style

     * Coronavirus

   Get the newsletter
   Search bar input (BUTTON) Search button
   __________________________________ ⤫

   Home / Entertainment / 50 Things Only People Who Lived in the 1990s
   Will Remember
   Entertainment

50 Things Only People Who Lived in the 1990s Will Remember

   The '90s may be gone, but the decade is anything but forgotten.
   By Sarah Crow
   May 15, 2019
   By Sarah Crow
   May 15, 2019
     *
     *
     *
     *

   i will always love you, whitney houston, the bodyguard, things only 90s
   kids remember RCA Records via YouTube

   Anyone who lived through the 1990s shares a fond nostalgia for all
   things associated with the era of frosted tips and Y2K panic. You can
   still practically taste your favorite Lip Smackers flavor, you remember
   the thrill of trying to get your call answered on Total Request Live,
   and you still wonder if you could have actually made millions on those
   old Beanie Babies you eventually donated to Goodwill. If you long for
   the days of hair mascara, Furbys, and dial-up internet, then read on
   for the things everyone who survived the '90s remembers.

   1
   The Pain of Seeing Your Tamagotchi Die
   tamagotchi digital pets, things only 90s kids remember tamagotchi
   digital pets, things only 90s kids remember Shutterstock

   The digital pets, which first hit shelves in Japan in 1996, quickly
   became a global phenomenon following their worldwide release the
   following year. Kids whose parents got them one of these needy little
   keychain creatures may have been delighted at first. But who doesn't
   remember the crushing feeling of finding out that their digital pet had
   died because they didn't find time to feed it between math class and
   gym?

   2
   Singing Along to the AOL Dial-Up Noise
   AOL log in screen, things only 90s kids remember AOL log in screen,
   things only 90s kids remember Shutterstock

   While having the world at your fingertips in just seconds today is
   pretty cool, there was something a little bit fun about the
   anticipation that came with logging into AOL and singing along to its
   chorus of screeches as you waited for the homepage to pop up. Unless
   your mom picked up the phone, of course.

   3
   Drinking Hi-C Ecto Cooler
   hi-c ecto cooler, things only 90s kids remember hi-c ecto cooler,
   things only 90s kids remember Amazon

   Your parents may not have let you drink soda, but you were pretty good
   at convincing them that Hi-C's toxic-slime colored Ecto Cooler was
   practically a health food. It was fruit-flavored, after all! And even
   if you missed out in the '90s, the recent Ghostbusters reboot means
   there's still plenty of the stuff available on Amazon.

   4
   Wondering if Ross and Rachel Would Ever Get Back Together
   david schwimmer, jennifer aniston, friends, things only 90s kids
   remember david schwimmer, jennifer aniston, friends, things only 90s
   kids remember IMDB/Warner Bros. Pictures

   Your own relationships may have had their ups and downs, but they were
   nothing compared to the constant will-they-won't-they dynamic between
   Ross and Rachel on Friends. Yes, we know they were on a break, but how
   long would it last?!

   5
   Trying to Determine Which Spice Girl You Were Most Like
   spice girls, things only 90s kids remember spice girls, things only 90s
   kids remember Shutterstock/Featureflash Photo Agency

   Before people were dividing themselves into Carries, Mirandas,
   Charlottes, and Samanthas, they were trying to figure out which Spice
   Girl's style and personality were most like their own. Of course, this
   led to countless fights over group Halloween costumes, but those
   hilarious pictures of you and your friends in sky-high platforms and
   Union Jack mini-dresses were well worth the drama.

   6
   Getting Excited to Show Off Your Trapper Keeper at School
   trapper keeper binder, things only 90s kids remember trapper keeper
   binder, things only 90s kids remember Amazon

   Getting new back to school clothing was cool, but getting a new Trapper
   Keeper (like this one available on Amazon) made you feel like you were
   going to rule the school in the coming year. From the interior pencil
   pocket to the satisfying crunch of the Velcro on its exterior flap,
   having one of these stylish binders made you almost look forward to
   hitting the books again. Almost.

   7
   The Joy of Getting the Last Copy of a Movie at Blockbuster
   blockbuster video store, things only 90s kids remember blockbuster
   video store, things only 90s kids remember Shutterstock

   Whether you were eager to scare yourself silly with a copy of The Sixth
   Sense or crack up with yet another screening of Groundhog Day, there
   was an unrivaled feeling of joy when you went to Blockbuster and found
   that not only was the movie you wanted in stock, but you got the last
   one.

   8
   Watching OJ Simpson's Low-Speed Car Chase and Subsequent Trial Play Out
   on TV
   oj simpson ford bronco, things only 90s kids remember oj simpson ford
   bronco, things only 90s kids remember ZUMA Press, Inc./Alamy Stock
   Photo

   Prior to 1994, a Ford Bronco was just a car. After OJ Simpson and his
   friend, former NFL player Al Cowlings, led the cops on a low-speed car
   chase through Los Angeles following the murders of his ex-wife Nicole
   Brown Simpson and her friend Ron Goldman, the car became inextricably
   linked to the racial tension, fear, and curiosity that gripped both his
   supporters and those who thought him guilty during the subsequent
   murder trial.

   9
   Talking on a Cell Phone the Size of a Brick
   90s motorola cell phone, things only 90s kids remember 90s motorola
   cell phone, things only 90s kids remember Shutterstock/Ben Slater

   While your average smartphone today may fit inside the pocket of your
   jeans, in the '90s, having a cell phone at all was pretty novel. And
   while early Motorola iterations weighed up to two pounds and were
   roughly the size of a standard brick, that didn't stop tech enthusiasts
   at the time from embracing them wholeheartedly.

   10
   Wearing a Plastic Raincoat to Stay Dry
   tommy hilfiger clear rain coat, things only 90s kids remember tommy
   hilfiger clear rain coat, things only 90s kids remember Macy's

   In the '90s, there was no need to decide between showing off your cute
   outfit and staying dry on a rainy day. Thanks to the proliferation of
   see-through raincoats on the market—frequently purchased at stores like
   Wet Seal and Contempo Casuals—you could give anyone eager to know what
   you were wearing a sneak peek. (And fortunately for those who missed
   out, designers like Tommy Hilfiger are capitalizing on our '90s
   nostalgia and still selling them at stores like Macy's today.)

   11
   Coveting Your Friends' Super Nintendo Systems
   super nintendo system, things only 90s kids remember super nintendo
   system, things only 90s kids remember Shutterstock/Robtek

   Released in the United States in 1991, the Super Nintendo quickly
   became the most popular gaming system since the Atari. With games like
   Super Mario World, Street Fighter II, and Donkey Kong Country, it was
   the next best thing to an arcade. And despite its popularity, the
   system's $199 price tag was relatively reasonable, especially by
   today's standards.

   12
   Wearing Hard Candy Rings on Every Finger
   hard candy nail polish, things only 90s kids remember hard candy nail
   polish, things only 90s kids remember Walmart

   Stylish kids of the '90s would rush to their local department store
   cosmetics counters to load up on Hard Candy nail polishes whenever a
   new shipment came in (though today they're easily purchased at your
   local Walmart). Sure, the polish had cool pastel and metallic colors
   and slightly risqué advertising, but it was those plastic rings on its
   nail polish bottles that really made the brand stand out.

   13
   The Excitement of Getting a New Lisa Frank Notebook
   lisa frank notebook, things only 90s kids remember lisa frank notebook,
   things only 90s kids remember Amazon

   What did neon colors, adorable puppies, and algebra class have in
   common in the '90s? They were all associated with Lisa Frank school
   supplies, the only back-to-school gear that rivaled the Trapper Keeper
   in popularity for '90s kids. (Luckily, you can still get some on Amazon
   today.)

   14
   Strapping on Your Doc Martens to Show Off Your Alternative Side
   doc marten boots, things only 90s kids remember doc marten boots,
   things only 90s kids remember Shutterstock/I Wei Huang

   Whether you were channeling your inner Lilith Fair fan or simply
   emulating Daria's iconic style, Doc Martens were a staple in countless
   closets in the '90s. The clunky combat boots went just as well with a
   pair of ripped jeans as they did with a baby doll dress.

   15
   Eagerly Taking Pollution Down to Zero with Captain Planet
   captain planet, things only 90s kids remember captain planet, things
   only 90s kids remember IMDB/Turner Home Entertainment

   Captain Planet may have been an unlikely hero, but to people growing up
   in the '90s, he was an icon. Children of the '90s couldn't wait to see
   what adventures in environmentalism this eco-crusader got up to every
   week—or show off what they learned when it came time to take out the
   recycling.

   16
   Having a Huge Crush on At Least One Saved by the Bell Cast Member
   saved by the bell, things only 90s kids remember saved by the bell,
   things only 90s kids remember Image via IMDB/NBC Productions

   Whether you loved Zack Morris' laid-back style, couldn't get enough of
   Lisa Turtle's scrunchies, or dreamed of sitting in the stands at
   Slater's wrestling match, for young adults in the '90s, there was at
   least one Saved by the Bell cast member who caught their eye.

   17
   Wishing Your Dad Was as Cool as Robin Williams in Mrs. Doubtfire
   mrs doubtfire, robin williams, things only 90s kids remember mrs
   doubtfire, robin williams, things only 90s kids remember IMDB/Twentieth
   Century Fox

   Sure, your dad was fine, save for the corny jokes and embarrassing
   socks-with-sandals combo he wore in the summer. But would he dress up
   like a British nanny and stick his face in a cake just to spend time
   with you? Doubtful.

   18
   Thinking Zima Was the Height of Adult Sophistication
   zima, things only 90s kids remember zima, things only 90s kids remember
   Walmart

   Beer and wine were fine, but if you wanted to host a truly epic
   get-together in the '90s, having a few six-packs of Zima on ice was
   non-negotiable. And if you want to host a '90s party today, you can
   still pick some up at Walmart.

   19
   Begging Your Parents for a Nickelodeon Radio
   nickelodeon alarm clock, things only 90s kids remember nickelodeon
   alarm clock, things only 90s kids remember Amazon

   If you were a kid in the 1990s, having a Nickelodeon radio alarm clock
   was just about the coolest bedroom accessory out there. Sure, it still
   went off at 6 a.m. to get you up for school, but being able to pull
   that little lever to hit snooze somehow made those early mornings a
   whole lot more bearable. You can even still purchase these
   brightly-colored clocks today on Amazon—albeit for nearly $500.

   20
   The Slap Bracelet Ban
   slap bracelets, things only 90s kids remember slap bracelets, things
   only 90s kids remember Walmart

   Did they occasionally leave a mark on your wrist? Sure. Were they
   basically just sticker-wrapped tape measures? Definitely. Did you still
   mourn the loss of your beloved slap bracelet when your teacher deemed
   it "too dangerous" for the classroom? 100 percent. And despite your
   teachers' insistence that they were practically weapons, they're still
   available at Walmart today.

   21
   Practicing the Macarena in the Mirror
   macarena dance, things only 90s kids remember macarena dance, things
   only 90s kids remember Richard Ellis/Alamy Stock Photo

   If you don't know the moves to the Macarena, did you really live
   through the '90s? Come on, even Colin Powell knew how to do it.

   22
   Having a Lip Smacker for Every Day of the Week
   bonne bell lip smackers, things only 90s kids remember bonne bell lip
   smackers, things only 90s kids remember Walmart

   The '90s spawned plenty of bad makeup trends, from frosted lipstick to
   hair mascara, but don't count Bonne Bell Lip Smackers among them. These
   lightly-pigmented lip balms—which you can still get at Walmart,
   actually—were a must-have for cosmetics enthusiasts in the '90s. The
   scent of the Dr. Pepper lip balm still conjures instant nostalgia for
   kids of this era.

   23
   Wishing You Lived in a House Like the One on The Fresh Prince of
   Bel-Air
   fresh prince of bel air, southwestern design 1990s home decor fresh
   prince of bel air, southwestern design 1990s home decor YouTube/Ghora
   Li Shui

   The height of sophistication in the '90s wasn't inspired by real
   royalty—it came from a different kind of prince entirely. Uncle Phil
   and Aunt Viv's plant-adorned mansion on The Fresh Prince had countless
   '90s kids begging their moms to shake the family tree and see if there
   were any rich relatives eager to take them in.

   24
   Thinking the Game Boy Color Was the Pinnacle of Tech Innovation
   game boy color system, things only 90s kids remember game boy color
   system, things only 90s kids remember Shutterstock/Dmitri Malyshev

   The only thing cooler than having a Game Boy in the '90s? Having a Game
   Boy Color. While its effects may seem a bit dinky by today's standards,
   seeing Kirby in his full bubblegum-pink glory or hopping over a bright
   red mushroom in Super Mario Land on a Game Boy Color was a truly
   life-changing event.

   25
   Being Obsessed with Your Colorful iMac
   imac computer, things only 90s kids remember imac computer, things only
   90s kids remember Shutterstock/Anton_Ivanov

   Sure, your average computer was cool, but if you really wanted to wow
   your friends in the '90s, you splurged on one of the colorful iMacs.
   Though their functionality wasn't significantly different than other
   computers at the time, seeing into the back of your Bondi Blue machine
   while waiting for Netscape to load felt like an amazing new adventure.

   26
   Being Disappointed when Your Discman's Anti-Skip Protection Didn't
   Deliver
   discman walkman, cd player, things only 90s kids remember discman
   walkman, cd player, things only 90s kids remember Shutterstock/Photo Oz

   Your Discman may have promised to keep your CDs from skipping. It may
   have even had a locking device on it that looked like it would keep
   your favorite mix CD safe. But as anyone who tried jogging with one can
   attest, the that anti-skip protection existed in name only.

   27
   Getting Too Spooked by Your Goosebumps Books to Fall Asleep
   Goosebumps books, things only 90s kids remember Goosebumps books,
   things only 90s kids remember Scholastic

   Your mom warned you. Your dad warned you. Your teachers warned you.
   Your school librarian warned you. But did you still read Goosebumps
   before bed, only to find yourself quaking in fear as thoughts of
   haunted carnivals and maniacal ventriloquist's dummies ran through your
   head? Of course. You can even still scare yourself silly today with a
   retro set of these creepy novels from Scholastic.

   28
   Feeling Like a Million Bucks After Getting Frosted Tips
   mark mcgrath, sugar ray, things only 90s kids remember mark mcgrath,
   sugar ray, things only 90s kids remember Shutterstock/Featureflash
   photo agency

   Doing your hair for a big night out in the '90s didn't just mean
   blow-drying it. For guys who really wanted to impress with their 'do,
   copying the frosted tips worn by numerous boy band members was the only
   way to do it. And if you want a more au courant style, start with these
   40 Ways to Have Amazing Hair Over 40.

   29
   Knowing All the Words to Weezer's Blue Album
   weezer blue album, things only 90s kids remember weezer blue album,
   things only 90s kids remember Amazon

   The '90s may have been the heyday of the boy band, but for folks who
   fancied themselves a little more alternative, Weezer's Blue Album was
   the go-to CD for any mood. Feeling upbeat? Put on "Buddy Holly." Kind
   of depressed? Play "Say It Ain't So." Going through a break-up? Your ex
   might not be there for you, but "Undone—The Sweater Song" still was.

   30
   Wondering How Those Little Gelatin Balls Floated in Orbitz Soda
   orbitz soda, things only 90s kids remember orbitz soda, things only 90s
   kids remember Image via Wikimedia Commons

   The '90s saw a lot of creativity in the beverage industry, but perhaps
   nothing was as mind-blowing as Orbitz soda. The clear sugary drink,
   which had brightly-colored gelatin balls suspended in it, was
   half-science project, half-beverage, and basically all you would beg
   your mom for when you went to the grocery store.

   31
   Dressing Like Austin Powers for Halloween
   austin powers movie, things only 90s kids remember austin powers movie,
   things only 90s kids remember IMDB/Capella Films

   Velour suit? Check. Bad fake teeth? Check. Feeling like an
   international man of mystery when you put on your oversized glasses?
   Yeah, baby!

   32
   Completely Believing Your Beanie Babies Would Make You a Millionaire
   beanie babie toy, things only 90s kids remember beanie babie toy,
   things only 90s kids remember Shutterstock/Linda Bestwick

   ae0fcc31ae342fd3a1346ebb1f342fcb

   Kids of the '90s thought there was a practical reason behind collecting
   Beanie Babies. They were convinced that someday, those limited-edition
   bears and turtles with the tags still on would be worth a fortune—if
   they ever got around to listing them on eBay, that is.

   33
   Using "Ironic" Wrong, Thanks to Alanis Morissette
   jagged little pill, things only 90s kids remember jagged little pill,
   things only 90s kids remember Shutterstock/Featureflash photo agency

   If you ask a strict grammarian, getting 10,000 spoons when you need a
   knife or rain on your wedding day aren't ironic. They're just
   unfortunate circumstances. But Alanis Morissette's Jagged Little Pill
   told you otherwise, so you used the word to describe basically any
   bummer of a situation you saw fit.

   34
   Singing "The Log Song" from Ren &amp; Stimpy Over and Over
   ren &amp; stimpy cartoon, things only 90s kids remember ren &amp; stimpy
   cartoon, things only 90s kids remember IMDB/Spümcø

   Strange, subversive, and totally addictive, Ren &amp; Stimpy was the '90s
   Nickelodeon cartoon beloved by those who wouldn't be caught dead
   watching Rugrats or Rocko's Modern Life. And for its devotees, "The Log
   Song" was a real ear worm. Everyone loves a log, after all.

   35
   Circling All the Items You Wanted from the Delia's Catalog
   delia's catalog, things only 90s kids remember delia's catalog, things
   only 90s kids remember Via Deliascatalogs.tumblr.com

   Teens in the '90s knew there was no greater excitement than getting a
   new Delia's catalog in the mail. You'd pore over the pages like it was
   Vogue's September issue, circling items you wanted and then trying to
   convince your parents that you couldn't go back to school without
   rainbow-striped track pants and a closet full of smiley-face crop tops.

   36
   Being Shocked by the Bill Clinton-Monica Lewinsky Affair
   monica lewinsky walking through crowd, things only 90s kids remember
   monica lewinsky walking through crowd, things only 90s kids remember
   Media Punch Inc/Alamy Stock Photo

   Though Bill Clinton was known for his charisma long before he entered
   the Oval Office, it was still shocking to folks who lived through the
   '90s to hear sordid details of a sitting president's sex
   life—especially one that involved 20-something intern Monica Lewinsky
   and not his wife.

   37
   Imagining What You Would Do If You Were Left Home Alone Like Kevin
   McAllister
   Home Alone film still Home Alone film still Photo 12/Alamy Stock Photo

   While going to Paris might seem like more fun than spending the
   holidays in frigid Chicago by your standards today, if you were a kid
   in the '90s, nothing seemed cooler than having your family forget you
   at home when they went on vacation—especially if it meant getting to
   try aftershave, eat endless ice cream sundaes, and fend off harebrained
   burglars.

   38
   Having a List of What Various Pager Codes Meant
   obsolete beeper, pager, things only 90s kids will remember obsolete
   beeper, pager, things only 90s kids will remember Shutterstock

   Beepers weren't just for doctors in the '90s. If you were cool enough
   to have one of these high-tech devices at the time, you wore it on your
   belt with pride. You also definitely kept a list of all the codes you
   needed to understand the messages you received on it in your pocket.

   39
   Being Crushed When Jordan Catalano Revealed His Song Wasn't About
   Angela on My So-Called Life
   jared leto, claire danes, my so-called life, things only 90s kids
   remember jared leto, claire danes, my so-called life, things only 90s
   kids remember IMDB/ABC Productions

   While it only ran for a single season, My So-Called Life was just about
   the most accurate TV portrayal of life as a young person in the '90s.
   You worried for Rayanne when she got drunk. You cried for Ricky when
   his family kicked him out. And your heart broke for Angela when it
   turned out that song Jordan Catalano wrote was just about his car.

   40
   Having LA Looks Stocked in Your Medicine Cabinet
   la looks hair gel, things only 90s kids remember la looks hair gel,
   things only 90s kids remember Amazon

   In the '90s, the spikier and wetter your hair looked, the better. To
   make sure not a strand went astray, medicine cabinets across the
   country were stocked with bottles of LA Looks gel, which are still
   available on Amazon. The product promised a serious hold on your hair
   and a just-shellacked look. And boy, did it deliver.

   41
   Being Terrified by the Temple Guards on Legends of the Hidden Temple
   legends of the hidden temple guard, nickelodeon shows, things only 90s
   kids remember legends of the hidden temple guard, nickelodeon shows,
   things only 90s kids remember IMDB/Pacific Bay Entertainment

   Going on Legends of the Hidden Temple was a dream of countless kids in
   the 1990s. The only thing stopping them (aside from their parents)? The
   not-so-minor fear of getting kidnapped by the temple guards.

   42
   Secretly Loving Aqua's "Barbie Girl"
   aqua barbie girl, things only 90s kids remember aqua barbie girl,
   things only 90s kids remember Amazon

   It may have been a silly pop song, but not only do most '90s kids know
   the words to "Barbie Girl" by heart, you probably still get a little
   pang of nostalgia when you hear it today. Truly, it's fantastic.

   43
   Trying to Figure Out a Magic Eye Picture With the Perfect Squint
   magic eye book, things only 90s kids remember magic eye book, things
   only 90s kids remember Amazon

   Was it just that your eyes focused differently than everyone else's?
   Were you cocking your head wrong? Unless you were one of the truly
   lucky ones for whom Magic Eye pictures immediately appeared, you likely
   spent hours trying to figure out how everyone else saw a sailboat where
   you just saw a psychedelic blue blur. (Luckily, if you want to practice
   your Magic Eye skills today, you can still get the books on Amazon).

   44
   Starting Your Sentences with "What's the deal with…," Thanks to
   Seinfeld
   jerry seinfeld, julia louis-dreyfus, things only 90s kids remember
   jerry seinfeld, julia louis-dreyfus, things only 90s kids remember
   IMDB/West-Shapiro, Castle Rock Entertainment

   Jerry, Elaine, George, and Kramer weren't just characters on a TV
   show—they were such a part of '90s life it almost felt like they were
   viewers' friends. And while you may not have gone out and bought a
   pirate shirt to celebrate your love for all things Seinfeld, you
   definitely borrowed the show's catch phrases from time to time.

   45
   Hearing Tickle Me Elmo's Laugh in Your Sleep
   tickle me elmo, things only 90s kids remember tickle me elmo, things
   only 90s kids remember Amazon

   Parents got in fights over it in malls. Kids wept when they didn't find
   it under the Christmas tree. And if you lived through the '90s—even if
   you didn't play with Tickle Me Elmo yourself, like this one still
   available today on Amazon—the sound of his high-pitched, mechanical
   laugh is still probably stuck in your head.

   46
   Trying to Hit the High Note in "I Will Always Love You"
   i will always love you, whitney houston, the bodyguard, things only 90s
   kids remember i will always love you, whitney houston, the bodyguard,
   things only 90s kids remember RCA Records via YouTube

   The Bodyguard was an undeniable cultural phenomenon when it hit
   theaters in 1992. The only thing more popular than the movie itself,
   however, was Whitney Houston's cover of Dolly Parton's "I Will Always
   Love You," which remains a karaoke staple for '90s enthusiasts to this
   day.

   47
   Joking About Eating Your Meals with "Fava Beans and a Nice Chianti"
   After Seeing Silence of the Lambs
   Anthony Hopkins in The Silence of the Lambs (1991) Anthony Hopkins in
   The Silence of the Lambs (1991) Orion Pictures

   While scary movies have been a staple in cinemas forever, 1991's
   Silence of the Lambs turned the genre on its head. Instead of a basic
   gore-fest, audiences got a sophisticated, even charming, serial killer
   in the form of Hannibal Lecter, as masterfully portrayed by Anthony
   Hopkins. And the movie's biggest enthusiasts got a new bone-chilling
   catch phrase.

   48
   Finding Yourself Stunned by the News of Kurt Cobain's Death
   kurt cobain of nirvana, things only 90s kids remember kurt cobain of
   nirvana, things only 90s kids remember Fabio Diena/Shutterstock

   Kurt Cobain was at the height of his fame in 1994 when the Nirvana
   front man took his own life in his Seattle home. Though Cobain had
   reportedly struggled with depression and addiction for years, it still
   sent shockwaves through the band's legion of loyal fans when the news
   of his death broke.

   49
   Wishing You Had a Job as Cool as the Kids at Empire Records Did
   Empire Records Liv Tyler Rennee Zellweger, things only 90s kids
   remember Empire Records Liv Tyler Rennee Zellweger, things only 90s
   kids remember IMDB/New Regency Pictures

   Your part-time job at Orange Julius may have made you enough money to
   buy your first car, but you longed for a gig as cool as working at the
   titular store in Empire Records. The 1995 cult classic movie not only
   made you desperate to sling CDs, it sparked countless fashion and music
   trends, from cropped mohair sweaters paired with plaid skirts to a
   reinvigorated love for the Gin Blossoms.

   50
   Gearing up for Y2K
   bill clinton y2k panic, things only 90s kids remember bill clinton y2k
   panic, things only 90s kids remember Richard Ellis/Alamy Stock Photo

   By the end of the '90s, Y2K panic was in full swing. People were
   worried that their computers would fry, their PINs would stop working,
   and that the stock market would crash. And then the ball dropped at
   midnight in 2000 and… nothing happened. But at least everyone had
   wallets full of cash, stores of canned food, and cases of bottled
   water, just in case. And for more blasts from the past, check out these
   20 Photos Only Kids Who Grew Up in the 1990s Will Understand.

   To discover more amazing secrets about living your best life, click
   here to follow us on Instagram!
   Sarah Crow
   Sarah Crow is a senior editor at Eat This, Not That!, where she focuses
   on celebrity news and health coverage. Read more
   Filed Under
   1990s • Entertainment • Fun Facts • Nostalgia
   Read This Next
     * teenage girls at a party in the 1990s teenage girls at a party in
       the 1990s

20 Slang Terms Every 1990s Kid Will Remember
       Make sure no one knocks you off your modem while you read this.
       January 2, 2021
     * The cast of Seinfeld, things only 90s kids will remember The cast
       of Seinfeld, things only 90s kids will remember

25 Funny Jokes from the 1990s That Will Make You Feel So Nostalgic
       You can't touch these punchlines.
       September 27, 2019
     * n'sync with frosted tips in the 1990s n'sync with frosted tips in
       the 1990s

20 Photos Only Kids Who Grew up in the 1990s Will Understand
       Virtually dying of dysentery? Yeah, that's a '90s thing.
       August 13, 2018

   Latest News
     * pnc bank location pnc bank location
       pnc bank location pnc bank location
       Smarter Living
    PNC Bank Is Closing 32 More Branches
       These closures affect 10 states.
     * Henry Cavill at the premiere of "The Witcher" in 2019 Henry Cavill
       at the premiere of "The Witcher" in 2019
       Henry Cavill at the premiere of "The Witcher" in 2019 Henry Cavill
       at the premiere of "The Witcher" in 2019
       Entertainment
    7 Stars Who Were Honest About Losing Roles
       These actors didn't hold back their disappointment.
     * nordstrom retail location nordstrom retail location
       nordstrom retail location nordstrom retail location
       Smarter Living
    Department Stores Are at Risk of Closures
       Analysts say Kohl's and Nordstrom may close stores.
     * small dog breed making a silly face small dog breed making a silly
       face
       small dog breed making a silly face small dog breed making a silly
       face
       Smarter Living
    Small Dog Breeds That Make Great Companions
       These tiny dogs are sweet, easy, and oh-so cute.
     * "Raw and Honest": Everything We Know About Pamela Anderson's "Real
       Story" and Her New Look "Raw and Honest": Everything We Know About
       Pamela Anderson's "Real Story" and Her New Look
       "Raw and Honest": Everything We Know About Pamela Anderson's "Real
       Story" and Her New Look "Raw and Honest": Everything We Know About
       Pamela Anderson's "Real Story" and Her New Look
       Entertainment
    "Raw and Honest": Everything We Know About Pamela Anderson's "Real
       Story" and Her New Look
       Here is what you need to know about the upcoming Pamela Anderson
       documentary
     * Jasmine Guy and Kadeem Hardison on "A Different World" Jasmine Guy
       and Kadeem Hardison on "A Different World"
       Jasmine Guy and Kadeem Hardison on "A Different World" Jasmine Guy
       and Kadeem Hardison on "A Different World"
       Entertainment
    "A Different World" Star Tried to Quit Show
       Jasmine Guy wanted to leave during Season 1.

   Read This Next
     * teenage girls at a party in the 1990s teenage girls at a party in
       the 1990s

20 Slang Terms Every 1990s Kid Will Remember
       Make sure no one knocks you off your modem while you read this.
       January 2, 2021
     * The cast of Seinfeld, things only 90s kids will remember The cast
       of Seinfeld, things only 90s kids will remember

25 Funny Jokes from the 1990s That Will Make You Feel So Nostalgic
       You can't touch these punchlines.
       September 27, 2019
     * n'sync with frosted tips in the 1990s n'sync with frosted tips in
       the 1990s

20 Photos Only Kids Who Grew up in the 1990s Will Understand
       Virtually dying of dysentery? Yeah, that's a '90s thing.
       August 13, 2018

     * Follow Best Life Follow

     * Facebook Facebook
     * Twitter Twitter
     * Instagram
     * LinkedIn LinkedIn

     * Facebook
     * Twitter
     * Instagram
     * LinkedIn

     * About Us
     * Terms and Conditions
     * Privacy Policy
     * Partner Sites
     * Advertise With Us
     * Get Our Newsletter
     * Sitemap

   © 2022 Galvanized Media. All Rights Reserved. Bestlifeonline.com is
   part of the Meredith Health Group
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-12">
<text>
   #alternate

   MENU (BUTTON)

   FROM THE MAGAZINE

Why Does ’90s Nostalgia Feel So Good Right Now?

   At a moment when life is strictly digital, references to the last
   analog decade abound.


   by Alex Hawgood
   Illustration by Jazz Grant
   01.31.22
     __________________________________________________________________

   Teen magazine cut-outs show the ’90s pop culture icons like Kate Moss,
   Courtney Love, Tupac, Spice G...

   Call it the Zuckerberg paradox: The more the 21st century is dominated
   by smart devices and social media, the more there is a collective
   longing for the 1990s, the decade that trumpeted the end of the
   millennium and marked the final gasp of a global culture about to be
   completely rewired by Big Tech. Everywhere you look, across music,
   fashion, film, and television, there seems to be a postmodern pining
   for a less plugged-in era.

   Few in the public eye wish they could turn back time as much as Adele,
   one of the music industry’s last remaining recording artists with a
   capital R. For the release of her latest album, 30, the singer
   persuaded Spotify to disable the shuffle button on all artists’ album
   pages, so that tracks would play in the chronological order of a vinyl
   record or CD. “This was the only request I had in our ever changing
   industry!” the singer tweeted. “We don’t create albums with so much
   care and thought into our track listing for no reason.” To drive home
   her point, she sells cassette tape versions of 30 on her official
   website.

   Victoria Christina Hesketh, better known by her stage name, Little
   Boots, takes a similar approach. Hesketh, who, like Adele, is in her
   30s, said her latest electro-pop single, “Landline,” is an ode to
   “being a teenager in the ’90s, when you would spend hours clogging up
   the family phone line to talk to your school boyfriend or girlfriends.”
   The slinky disco track came about during lockdown, when she and her
   friends were “doing quizzes and Zoom dance parties, and it reminded me
   how we used to cope before the Internet and computers,” she said. “The
   ’90s are like a warm, fuzzy sweater we can put on and feel reassured.”

   Like music, fashion has always looked back to move forward. This
   season, cargo pants and carpenter jeans appeared at Missoni; the idea
   of underwear as outerwear was revisited by Prada; and Miu Miu showed
   exaggeratedly cropped, cable-knit sweaters and low-rise, teeny-tiny
   khaki miniskirts with brown belts that called to mind
   turn-of-the-millennium teenybopper naughtiness. At Chanel, designer
   Virginie Viard, who staged her show with an old-school elevated runway,
   went for accessory-laden leotards and jaw-length bobs, echoing house
   signatures from 30 years prior. The then-meets-now mood was reinforced
   by the choice of Christine and the Queens’ cover of “Freedom,” George
   Michael’s huge ’90s hit, for the soundtrack.

   A look from Miu Miu spring 2022.
   Estrop/Getty Images Entertainment/Getty Images.
   A model wears a tiny khaki belted miniskirt from the Spring 2022 Miu
   Miu collection.

   The trend is not limited to the runways. “Reinvention and Restlessness:
   Fashion in the Nineties,” an exhibition of Maison Martin Margiela’s
   hoof-shaped Tabi boots, Prada’s minimalist nylon backpacks, and other
   decade-defining high fashion, is on view through April at the Museum at
   FIT, in New York. “The World of Anna Sui,” a survey of the designer’s
   hippie-grunge staples and her inspirations from the era (think qipao
   dresses and Nirvana), is showing at the Mint Museum Randolph, in
   Charlotte, North Carolina, through May. “I’ve heard a lot of people
   comment that you could wear the clothes today, because they don’t seem
   like they’re from another period. That, to me, is a huge compliment,”
   Sui said. “People are missing the realness of that era, and how it
   wasn’t yet a manufactured or corporate thing.”

   Naomi Campbell (left) and Anna Sui (center) during the designer’s
   fashion show on November 1, 1995.
   Photo by Ron Galella, Ltd./Ron Galella Collection via Getty Images.
   Naomi Campbell and Anna Sui walk the runway, holding a large flower
   bouquet after the 1995 Anna Sui ...

   Ava Nirui, the art director of Marc Jacobs’s Heaven line, which takes
   inspiration from Sofia Coppola’s 1999 indie opus, The Virgin Suicides,
   agreed. “The younger generation definitely romanticizes a time before
   the Internet,” she said. “The ’90s were the most ‘advanced’ pre-Web era
   in terms of culture, which is why it might seem so appealing to those
   who didn’t experience it.” Revisiting favorite moments of the past can
   also offer opportunities for thoughtful reexamination. As Colleen Hill,
   the curator of the FIT exhibition, combed through the museum’s
   permanent collection for a section of the show devoted to the “global
   wardrobe” (a term Hill said she cribbed from an early-’90s issue of i-D
   magazine), she encountered thorny threads to unspool. “The tricky thing
   is that many ’90s designs would be considered cultural appropriation by
   today’s standards,” she said. “Trying to navigate how a Chinese dragon
   on a Todd Oldham dress was viewed then, versus how it would be viewed
   now, is not an easy thing to do, but I thought it was really important
   to at least try to have that conversation in the exhibition.”

   Simon Rex during a 1997 Tommy Hilfiger party.
   Photo by Jeff Kravitz/FilmMagic, Inc.
   Simon Rex poses in an oversized outfit with arms wide open at the 1997
   Tommy Hilfiger Party.

   At times, however, the ceaseless nostalgia feedback loop can feel more
   mind-numbing than eye-opening. Simon Rex, the ’90s adult-film twunk
   turned MTV VJ heartthrob, may be earning Oscar buzz at the age of 47
   for his portrayal of a washed-up porn star in Red Rocket, but does the
   world really need Carrie, Miranda, and Charlotte pounding the Manhattan
   pavement, sans Samantha, in the Sex and the City sequel And Just Like
   That…? Queens, the ABC musical drama, stars Brandy Norwood; can it be a
   coincidence that her mid-’90s UPN sitcom, Moesha, was recently picked
   up by Netflix, and that her 1997 TV musical film, Cinderella, with
   Whitney Houston, is now available on Disney+? Then there is
   Twentysomethings: Austin, a new reality series billing itself as the
   true story of eight 20-somethings who set out to find success in life
   and love, while sharing a bachelor pad in Austin, Texas—or, as one
   Twitter user joked, “Not someone pitching The Real World to Netflix and
   getting it greenlit.” At least the creators of Peacock’s Saved by the
   Bell redux appear to be a little more self-aware. “That’s why we have
   all these reboots of teen shows from the ’90s. Get a new idea,
   Hollywood,” a character quips during an episode from the show’s
   current, second season.

   It is an inescapable reality that nowadays, whether in film, music,
   television, or tech, those corporate behemoths that Sui said were not
   pervasive in her heyday are the ones churning out more and more tokens
   of ’90s faux-thenticity. Nintendo now offers a paid subscription
   upgrade to its popular Switch Online console, giving users the chance
   to play classic games from Sega Genesis and Nintendo 64, like Ecco the
   Dolphin, from 1992, and Mario Kart 64, from 1996. Amazon has its very
   own “90s throwback” section, complete with Smashing Pumpkins double CDs
   and enzyme-washed replicas of original Aaliyah commemorative
   merchandise. Even Hasbro makes “grown-up” Play-Doh packs engineered to
   evoke the buttery popcorn smells ubiquitous at Blockbuster video stores
   in the ’90s.

   Aaliyah performs at KMEL Summer Jam, 1997.
   Photo by Tim Mosenfelder/Getty Images.
   Aaliyah performs at KMEL Summer Jam 1997, wearing sunglasses and a
   baggy red tracksuit with a midrif...

   Makeovers are often more successful in the hands of Generation Z. For
   her debut album, Sour, the 18-year-old pop powerhouse Olivia Rodrigo
   has used imagery that oscillates between the Total Request Live
   sensuality of Britney Spears during her 1999 ...Baby One More Time
   ascent and Courtney Love’s punk-prom aesthetic from Hole’s seminal 1994
   album, Live Through This. On a personal level, the singer has been
   serving leggy luxury straight out of Cher Horowitz’s wardrobe in
   Clueless; think of her Instagram selfies in body-hugging plaid babydoll
   dresses, or her much-publicized visit to the White House last July, in
   a vintage Chanel spring 1995 tweed suit.

   Arbiters of cool from the past represent “individuality, personal
   expression, and subcultures that were demonized by adults in their
   day,” said the fashion and culture researcher James Abraham, who
   created @90sanxiety, an Instagram handle that has amassed more than 2
   million followers with its meticulously curated feed overflowing with
   everything from an early Xanax advertisement to stills of Halle Berry
   from the 1997 camp classic B.A.P.S. It’s also significant that icons
   from that period, like Kurt Cobain and Debut-era Björk, were exempt
   from participating in the endless slog of daily content that is the
   norm today. Abraham pointed out that “there are only X number of photos
   of Kate Moss that exist from, say, 1993.” That, he said, makes them
   seem rare and “very pure, in a way.”

   The big business of a vintage vantage point is not lost on Abraham, who
   has given branding lectures at business schools and consulted for Nike.
   “Everyone is cycling back to things that they might have seen or done,
   because they are safe and tested,” he said. This is a foolproof formula
   for analytics addicts, whether they are Instagram archivists or Amazon
   chief executives. What the moody remix of Madonna’s 1998 ballad
   “Frozen,” which went viral on TikTok last year, has in common with the
   resale market for the classic Range Rover LSE from 1993 is that both
   are fueled by our shared memory bank. The end goal for companies and
   creators alike is to “tap into an existing audience,” Abraham
   explained, and capitalize on “the success of the original.”

   There is no doubt that this endless retro stream offers an escape to a
   time when a car phone was a rare luxury. But the very persistence and
   pervasiveness of today’s mass nostalgia is only possible, of course,
   thanks to the algorithmic engines driving TikTok, Netflix, and other
   Big Tech platforms—in other words, the very same online tar pits we
   dream of escaping. To quote ’90s icon Alanis Morissette—currently the
   subject of Jagged, a new HBO Max documentary—isn’t it ironic?

   Heaven bag with chain: Courtesy of Marc Jacobs; Adele cassette:
   Columbia records; Prada backpack, Maison Margiela Tabi boots, Pleats
   Please Issey Miyake dress: The Museum at FIT; all others: Getty Images.

Get the Look

   Re/Done Cardigan
   $473
   Farfetch
   Re/Done Cardigan
   Balenciaga Skirt
   $575
   Farfetch
   Balenciaga Skirt
   Heaven by Marc Jacobs Boots
   $490
   Marc Jacobs
   Heaven by Marc Jacobs Boots
   Alexander Mcqueen Leather Biker Jacket: image 1
   Alexander McQueenAlexander Mcqueen Leather Biker Jacket
   $2,777
   (BUTTON) View product
   Wales Bonner Track Pants
   $540
   MatchesFashion
   Wales Bonner Track Pants
   Miu Miu Bucket Hat
   $480
   Moda Operandi
   Miu Miu Bucket Hat
   Versace Dress
   $991
   MatchesFashion
   Versace Dress
   Prada Trousers
   $1,430
   Farfetch
   Prada Trousers
   Marni Mohair Sweater: image 1
   MarniMarni Mohair Sweater
   $657
   (BUTTON) View product

   [ ]

   [ ] W
   SEARCH (BUTTON) CLOSE (BUTTON)
   ____________________
   (BUTTON)
     * The Holiday Issue
     * Fashion
     * Culture
     * Entertainment
     * Beauty
     * Life
     * Video
     * Subscribe
     * Newsletter

     * Archive
     * Advertise
     * Terms
     * Privacy
     * DMCA

   W Magazine © W Media 2022

   [p-xPmcrFNGfHkBg.gif]
   [p?c1=2&amp;amp;c2=17519299&amp;amp;cs_ucfr=0&amp;amp;cv=2.0&amp;amp;cj=1]
   [tr?id=1636673763227734&amp;amp;ev=PageView&amp;amp;noscript=1]
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-13">
<text>
   #Admind » Feed Admind » Comments Feed Admind » ’90s nostalgia – how we
   learned to love the unlovable? Comments Feed alternate alternate
   alternate

   [tr?id=137579033636089&amp;ev=PageView&amp;noscript=1]

   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-PJWGJRN

     * Home
     * Services
     * Projects
     * About
     * Contact us

     * Teams
     * Careers
     * Blog
     * Social impact

   European Union

     * Branding
     * Design

’90s nostalgia – how we learned to love the unlovable?

   Author: Maciej Kałuża

   October 3, 2022
   6 min read

   Share this article on
   (BUTTON) (BUTTON)
   ’90s nostalgia – how we learned to love the unlovable?

   Until recently, it may have caused a feeling of slight embarrassment
   and distaste. Today, more and more designers are falling for the ’90s
   nostalgia.

   Business was booming. With the fall of the Soviet Union, the threat of
   the atomic war faded. And finally, you could get a Discman that would
   work when jogging in your new Nike shoes. MTV – the YouTube of the ‘90s
   – bombed our vision with brightly coloured clips for music suddenly
   filled with Casio synthesizers. A secret mission was carried out in
   Microsoft to design Comic Sans, a font all designers would hate, and
   all non-designers would use almost everywhere. In design, you could
   pour a bucket of magenta, and add a lot of yellow, and nobody would
   snort with disbelief. The ‘90s were a pain to any designer’s eyes…
   Vanilla Ice elctronic rap game design Source:
   https://boardgamegeek.com/image/223296/vanilla-ice-electronic-rap-game

The colourful but cheerful ’90s

   But apparently, it is much less painful for the contemporary soul. So,
   can we actually be feeling nostalgia for the design trends of the
   1990s? Well, the question can’t have any rational answer, because, any
   nostalgic feeling in design trends probably defies the laws of logic,
   going back to the power of the strong feelings we have attached to the
   cultural phenomena of the era. From a different angle though, the
   decade of the 1990s was far too rich in cultural phenomena to be simply
   summed up. Or covered by a conclusion about dominance splashing
   contrasting colours and oversized letters. We had Anti-design, Grunge,
   Groovival, and Memphis still holding on, and almost everybody thought
   of himself as post-something. So, like any nostalgia, the flashback to
   the 90s can actually relate to very different things and completely
   different foundations of design.

   Yet, there seems to be some sort of a comeback to the 1990s, usually
   combining artifacts of the era with typography and a strong colour
   palette:
   O love the 90's poster Source:
   https://pl.pinterest.com/pin/646899933983307999/

Where does the ’90s nostalgia come from?

   It would probably require a lot of research to find out if and why is
   this happening. But fortunately, we can just sit back, watch what’s
   happening recently, and easily jump to hasty conclusions. These will
   probably be impossible to rationally support, but let’s just take a
   long shot. We miss the colourful ’90s because we got hit really hard.
   Historically and culturally, whatever is happening since 2020 makes us
   simply more and more depressed. Apocalyptic headlines of our
   functional, minimalistic, and user-friendly news channels are light
   years away from the shared optimistic feelings of the ’90s. To a
   certain degree, one might argue, that culturally, things started
   falling apart after the ‘90s, interrupted suddenly by 9/11, millennial
   culture, and the horrible discovery that we are not a global village.
   And having reached – what an optimistic thought! After the rock-bottom
   of lockdown, pandemic, and war pessimism, we simply would rather pour a
   bucket of magenta onto our white, minimalist, and ascetic website… just
   because.

   Nostalgia is a powerful and complex feeling. It adds emotion to
   seemingly distant artifacts of the past, which – quite honestly – must
   have had a completely different meaning and context 30 years ago. But
   when we get back to them now, we add a lot of emotional luggage to them
   and in effect, see this:
   90s design trends Source:
   https://www.envato.com/blog/90s-graphic-design-trends/

   Some of us might nostalgically produce an “Ohh” sigh, instead of
   wondering, what the hell is going on with this background? Because
   those of us who still remember the ‘90s remember the VHS covers and
   movie posters. They nostalgically come back to the memories of the
   times when ‘Friends’ gags were still funny. The thing is quite obvious,
   we simply connect good times with that era, regardless of whatever
   judgment the history of design would produce regarding its aesthetics.

   See how ’90s nostalgia can be seen today:
   youth foria website design in 90s style Source:
   https://youthforia.co/just dance 2022 design - 90s nostalgia Source:
   https://image.api.playstation.com/vulcan/img/rnd/202110/1518/wLMXX745Iy
   3XvuGeL5Z1gChYcaptain marvel - nostalgic website Source:
   https://www.marvel.com/captainmarvel/

How to use nostalgia in brand communication?

   But let’s be less nostalgic for a while and think, what function could
   the comeback to ‘90s trends have on branding? And here, referring to
   ‘90s design will most likely have quite a significant effect, for no
   less than two reasons:
    1. They relate to the emotional sphere of the spectator (assuming, of
       course, their memory of the ‘90s is richer than watching Gummi
       Bears) and reach back to memories of the 1990s, which, generally
       have a positive connotation.
    2. They are different, brighter, and “louder” than quite a lot of
       contemporary designs.

   Last but not least, such a trip down the designer’s memory lane can
   simply be fun for the designer: “Hey, how about not making this one
   more minimalistic, and adding a pink cheetah pattern in the background
   instead?”*

   Coming back to the pragmatic question: whatever element of the past
   design is taken up by your brand to launch a new campaign, it actually
   might work from a scientific perspective. According to a study from the
   College of Business and Economics, Washington State University,
   consumers tend to rate nostalgia-themed advertisements better in
   comparison to non-nostalgic ads**. The question could be: why? And I
   guess we come back to my initial suspicion: relating to 90s nostalgia
   makes a lot of sense in the post-pandemic context. We might not be
   tired of all-encompassing usability, minimalism, and pristine
   typography. We might simply be tired of the contemporary events and
   basically anything related to them. In an era, when almost everybody
   considers the future uncertain, possibly dangerous, this kind of
   nostalgic comeback may seem to offer some relief. It may be hard to
   believe if you simply focus on the visual side. It makes sense,
   however, assuming that design is, was, and will always be much more
   than that!

   *Yes, I know it sounds bad, but sometimes, instead of overthinking,
   just design a pink cheetah pattern and have fun!
   ** The Power of Reflection: An Empirical Examination of Nostalgia
   Advertising Effects on JSTOR

   Did you enjoy this article? Also checkout our ’80s nostalgia and
   Cyberpunk aesthetic essay.

   Share this article on
   (BUTTON) (BUTTON)

   The courage to be an imperfect artist or how not to get stuck on your
   way to perfection
     * Design

The courage to be an imperfect artist or how not to get stuck on your way to
perfection

   Designing for accessibility – 3 tips from an interaction designer
     * Design
     * Social Impact

Designing for accessibility – 3 tips from an interaction designer

   Why brands are boring?
     * Branding

Why brands are boring?

   How is coronavirus changing our events and exhibition industry?
     * Branding
     * Social Impact

How is coronavirus changing our events and exhibition industry?

140 experts.
12 teams.
5 offices.

Let's talk!

   Give us a call at
   (+48) 12 265 51 45
   Contact us

   Admind agency
   Clutch

   Amsterdam [email protected]

   Bangkok [email protected]

   Krakow [email protected]

   Odessa [email protected]

   Zurich [email protected]
     * Home
     * Services
     * Projects
     * About
     * Contact us
     * Team
     * Careers
     * Blog
     * Social impact

   Subscribe to our newsletter

   © 2021 Admind. All rights reserved. Privacy policy
   Code of Conduct

   Cookies

   We use cookies to enhance your experience. By continuing to visit this
   site you agree to our use of cookies.
   OK
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-14">
<text>
   If you are seeing this message, that means JavaScript has been disabled
   on your browser, please enable JS to make this app work.

   IFRAME: //www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-5RD8FD

   IFRAME: //www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-PWNBGVS

   (BUTTON) Open Menu
    Home Health Money Travel Food Style
   (BUTTON)
   [789da85838ff6290ea2fc1fb7753e8b6.png]
   #ZoomerDaily
   (BUTTON)
   [1a4e69f97a98d5d2dd16889a78644848.png]
   Policy &amp; Perspective
   (BUTTON)
   [786e4ff3f167e9ade6b0ae4163f0765e.png]
   Arts &amp; Entertainment
   (BUTTON)
   [fe202f7c32b322266e30c2e5e8cd8f47.png]
   Book Club
   (BUTTON)
   [53ae73b92d2caeb0cfc6623a87c26f8c.png]
   Classifieds
   (BUTTON)
   [facf9333bb0d8a0051a586ef5c2c2052.png]
   Stars &amp; Royals
   (BUTTON)
   [2812d8cf342ec0b65f1d23d9b629ff70.png]
   Sex &amp; Love

Subscribe

   NewslettersMagazine

Everything Zoomer

   AboutPrivacy PolicyTerms of ServiceAdvertiseContact Us
   (BUTTON) Close Menu
   (BUTTON) Toggle navigation
     * Home
     * Health
          + Longevity
          + Diet &amp; Nutrition
          + Zoomer Fitness
          + Zoomer Yoga
     * Money
          + Real Estate
          + Personal Finance
          + Work &amp; Retirement
          + Budget
          + Investing
     * Travel
          + Zooming: Travel Hub
          + Zoomer Golf
          + Savvy Tips
          + Destinations
          + Best of Canada
          + Bucket List
     * Food
          + Recipes
          + Libations
          + Celeb Chefs
          + Entertaining
     * Style
          + Fashion
          + Beauty
          + Home &amp; Garden
          + Shopping
     * Book Club
     * Classifieds
     *

     * NewsletterSubscribe

   (BUTTON)
   Everything Zoomer
     * Home
     * Health
          + Longevity
          + Diet &amp; Nutrition
          + Zoomer Fitness
          + Zoomer Yoga
     * Money
          + Real Estate
          + Personal Finance
          + Work &amp; Retirement
          + Budget
          + Investing
     * Travel
          + Zooming: Travel Hub
          + Zoomer Golf
          + Savvy Tips
          + Destinations
          + Best of Canada
          + Bucket List
     * Food
          + Recipes
          + Libations
          + Celeb Chefs
          + Entertaining
     * Style
          + Fashion
          + Beauty
          + Home &amp; Garden
          + Shopping
     * Book Club
     * Classifieds
     *

     * NEWSLETTERSubscribe

Way Back When? The ’90s Nostalgia Boom and Why We All Long for a Simpler Time

   Mike Crisolago | December 5th, 2019
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   90s nostalgia

   Photo: Mark Piovesan via iStock / Getty Images Plus

   The word “nostalgia” evokes images of everything from classic cars to
   Woodstock to bellbottoms, all the way back to the golden age of
   Hollywood. Think James Dean in Rebel Without a Cause, not James Van Der
   Beek in Dawson’s Creek. But the ’90s began 30 years ago, meaning that
   nostalgia for that decade today is akin to nostalgia for the 1970s in
   the year 2000. And no one made a fuss about that.

   Yes, the 1990s are officially nostalgic because, just as Paul Simon
   sang, “Every generation throws a hero up the pop charts,” every
   generation also tints their pop culture with rosy reminiscences. Now,
   it’s the millennial generation’s turn.

   The ’90s nostalgia kick began in the early 2010s but gained serious
   traction in recent years, fuelled by total pop culture recall like the
   resurgence of the hit sitcom Friends — thanks to Netflix — including
   50-year-old Jennifer Aniston, who crashed Instagram in October when she
   joined the social media platform with a photo of her and
   the Friends cast, setting a world record by amassing one million
   followers in just over five hours. She currently stands at 21 million
   followers and counting.
   90s nostalgia Jennifer Aniston’s first Instagram post, a current photo
   of the cast of “Friends.” Clockwise from front: Jennifer Aniston, Lisa
   Kudrow, Courteney Cox, Matt LeBlanc, David Schwimmer and Matthew Perry.
   Photo: Jennifer Aniston/Instagram


   Of course, millennials make up close to 65 per cent of Instagram’s user
   base, which explains why ‘90s nostalgia accounts flourish, offering
   users a regular fix of the decade’s cultural headliners, from the
   Britney Spears/Justin Timberlake romance to Kirk Cobain candids to
   Dennis Rodman’s outlandish hairstyles and, of course, photos of the
   Friends cast.

   Meanwhile, hit ’90s shows like Full House, Boy Meets World and Beverly
   Hills 90210 landed reboots as bands like Backstreet Boys, the Spice
   Girls, Smashing Pumpkins and Hootie and the Blowfish returned to
   touring. Even Canuck rocker Alanis Morissette, 45, announced she’ll hit
   the road in 2020 to mark the 25th anniversary of Jagged Little Pill,
   her seminal 1995 album, alongside fellow ’90s mainstays Liz Phair and
   the band Garbage. McDonald’s, meanwhile, brought back ’90s-era Happy
   Meal toys, lip gloss sales surged  and ‘90s themed board games are hot
   holiday gift items in 2019.

The 1990s as Nostalgia? As If!

   Rapper Vanilla Ice, 52, who dropped his hit album To the Extreme in
   1990, told Rolling Stone last year that he considers the 1990s the
   “last truly great decade,” adding, “How would you look back at 2000 to
   2017 and remember anything? How would you see somebody wearing some
   gear and say, ‘Hey, that’s gotta be from 2014?’ There’s no music there,
   there’s no pop culture, there’s no fashion that defines the
   generation.”

   In a similar vein, Bustle’s Sophie Atkinson says, “We’re emotionally
   invested in the entertainment from [the ’90s] because back then, with
   limited access to every album/TV show/film ever, the ones you did own
   meant absolutely everything to us.”

   In 1998, when she was 13, Toronto-based journalist and editor Randi
   Bergman filled a time capsule with personal items of the era —
   everything from Spice Girls stickers to Titanic movie ticket stubs to
   candy wrappers and photos of celebrity crushes. She opened the capsule
   in 2017 and created a viral hit when she shared the contents on
   Instagram, following it up with a podcast about nostalgia and now
   a website, Capsule 98.  It’s dedicated to “the formative objects,
   places and experiences that shape who we are,” regardless of generation
   or decade.
   90s nostalgia A mixtape of popular songs from 1998 that Randi Bergman
   included in her time capsule. It includes “As Long As You Love Me” by
   her favourite group at the time, Backstreet Boys. Photo: Randi
   Bergman/Instagram


   The 34-year-old suggests one reason for the boom in ’90s nostalgia is
   that millennials fully indulge it online in a way that previous
   generations, who didn’t have the internet when they were in their 20s
   and 30s, never could.

   “Another reason that I know is because of the direness of how
   everybody’s thinking of the world right now and the fact that things
   are very down,” she says in an interview. “Maybe people are nostalgic
   for an easier, simpler time, pre-social media. That could be part of it
   too.”

I Want It That Way

   Bergman may be on to something. In 2013, University of Surrey
   psychologist Erica Hepper told the New York Times that feelings of
   nostalgia actually peak in young adults and again in old age while
   slumping somewhat in the years in between.  “Nostalgia helps us deal
   with transitions,” Hepper said. “The young adults are just moving away
   from home and or starting their first jobs, so they fall back on
   memories of family Christmases, pets and friends in school.”

   For millennials, like other generations, nostalgia serves as a safety
   blanket, a source of comfort and a means of temporary escape from the
   demands of adulthood. The word “nostalgia” itself is a combination of
   two Greek words that mean “homecoming” and “pain.” Or, in other words,
   homesick.

   But Bergman adds that nostalgia also serves another purpose, serving as
   a kind of online shorthand.

   “For example, take a meme — put a picture of some classic ’90s thing
   and put some new frame of reference on it, and it instantly makes
   sense. Whereas someone like my sister [who is 10 years older] … it
   doesn’t immediately resonate to her the same way.”

   Another Canadian millennial, Lee Davis, 24, takes the idea of nostalgia
   as communication to the next level with HideSeek, a pop-up he
   co-founded that currently resides in Montreal and courts millennials
   “wanting highly interactive experiences that are also very shareable
   and Instagramable.”

   HideSeek is unique in the nostalgia business in that it isn’t pegged to
   specific pop-culture references. Guests tour rooms outfitted with
   elements relatable to all generations: rooms themed around items like
   crayons, boxes of classic kids’ cereals, a Slinky salon, a shopping
   cart to push your pals around in and even a ball pit. In addition, some
   rooms contain oversized items, their massive scale creating a childlike
   sensation for visitors.
   90s nostalgia Visitors enjoy the Salon Slinky at HideSeek. Photo:
   HideSeek/Instagram


   “That’s what we really focused on — less about specific nostalgic
   memories and more to create an experience that lets you feel like a
   kid,” Davis says. His idea of nostalgia is centred on the notion of
   “play,” evoking memories of recess or after school sports.

   “Nostalgia’s just so powerful,” he adds. “And I can just see it from
   the customers’ reactions. When they see something that reminds them of
   their past or it makes them feel like kids, they get this warm, gushy
   feeling.”

   Davis says people of all ages, including grandparents with their
   grandkids, enjoy HideSeek, including “two grandmas [who came] in, and
   they took a photo in the shopping cart and in the ball pit, and it went
   pretty viral.” But his customer base remains millennials, many of whom
   come in search of an escape from the daily grind. “They say, ‘Oh my
   god, I get to go to a one-hour experience that’s going to let me feel
   like a kid again? I get to step outside from my normal day-to-day
   routine?’”
   90s nostalgia It’s not just millennials who enjoy the ball pit at
   HideSeek. Photo: HideSeek/Instagram

Beyond ’90s Nostalgia

   At the same time, millennial nostalgia extends beyond the 1990s to
   feeling  fondness for a time they didn’t even experience.

   In fact, a 2013 study out of Cornell University showed that “music
   transmitted from generation to generation shapes autobiographical
   memories, preferences, and emotional responses, a phenomenon we call
   ‘cascading reminiscence bumps.’” The study used specific examples of
   millennials in their 20s listening to the music their parents enjoyed
   at the same age.

   Elaine Wren regularly witnesses a similar nostalgic phenomenon in
   action. The 52-year-old Toronto native works as the show manager for
   Steve Michaels, an Elvis Presley tribute performer, and has worked with
   Beatles tribute performers as well. She regularly sees three
   generations of family members attend the concerts, adding, “If the
   grandparent or parents were invested in that time period and that
   music, it seems to have been passed on generation to generation. That’s
   the only way they can experience what their older relatives experienced
   … They see it through their eyes.”
   90s nostalgia Elvis Presley tribute performer Steve Michaels as the
   King of Rock ‘n’ Roll. Photo: Steve Michaels as ELVIS/Facebook


   For Wren, “Nostalgia kicks in when you’re trying to keep a feeling
   alive, keep a memory alive. I think nostalgia’s more of a feeling. It’s
   sometimes not even [attached to] a time frame.” And like nostalgic
   millennials, Wren says that many of the older audience members she
   speaks to “miss the simplicity of ‘back then,’ and these shows take
   them back to that world that they miss.”

How Looking Back Allows Us to Move Forward

   In reality, both baby boomers and millennials yearn for a simpler time.
   The only difference is the decade for which they long. Generational
   preferences aside, though, it turns out that nostalgia is actually good
   for you.

   Clay Routledge, a psychology professor and author of Nostalgia: A
   Psychological Resource, told New Orleans Public Radio in 2017 that
   while people turn to nostalgia in times of stress,  it actually makes
   them more optimistic about the future. He adds that studies “show this
   both in terms of people reporting that they’re more optimistic about
   the future, more inspired but also behaviourally, too, in terms of
   people actually going out and wanting to interact with and meet people
   after they’ve engaged in nostalgia.”

   So ultimately, while decades and generations move on, the human impulse
   to revisit our past for a nostalgic boost remains constant. And that’s
   a good thing, regardless of what you actually consider nostalgia.

   “I feel like everybody connects to nostalgia in a different way,
   whether you’re 90 or you’re 10,” Bergman says. “I think about it all
   the time — what are the things now that we take for granted or that are
   so commonplace? And we’re just going to one day be like, ‘Oh, I miss
   Netflix binging.’ Who knows? That could be nostalgic.”

   RELATED:

   Nostalgia: A Tale of Christmas Past at Eaton’s Toyland

   Nostalgia: A Wartime Recipe for Woolton Pie

   Nostalgia: A Throwback to When Papers Were Delivered by Erstwhile,
   Ink-Stained Kids

   Nostalgia: 50 Years Later, A Look Back At Woodstock
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)

   EXPLORE  HealthMoneyTravelFoodStyleBook
   ClubClassifieds#ZoomerDailyPolicy &amp; Perspective
   Arts &amp; EntertainmentStars &amp; RoyaltySex &amp; Love

   CONNECT  FacebookTwitterInstagram

   SUBSCRIBE  Terms of Subscription ServiceE-NewslettersSubscribe to
   Zoomer Magazine

   BROWSE  AboutMastheadContact UsAdvertise with UsPrivacy Policy

   EverythingZoomer.com is part of the ZoomerMedia Digital Network
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-15">
<text>
   #alternate Edit this page Wikipedia (en)

Rosy retrospection

   From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
   Jump to navigation Jump to search
   Psychological phenomenon for which past is judged far better than
   present
   This article needs additional citations for verification. Please help
   improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced
   material may be challenged and removed.
   Find sources: "Rosy retrospection" – news · newspapers · books ·
   scholar · JSTOR (July 2019) (Learn how and when to remove this template
   message)

   Rosy retrospection refers to the psychological phenomenon of people
   sometimes judging the past disproportionately more positively than they
   judge the present. The Romans occasionally referred to this phenomenon
   with the Latin phrase "memoria praeteritorum bonorum", which translates
   into English roughly as "the past is always well remembered".^[1] Rosy
   retrospection is very closely related to the concept of nostalgia. The
   difference between the terms is that rosy retrospection could be
   understood as a cognitive bias, whereas the broader phenomenon of
   nostalgia is not usually seen as based on a biased perspective.

   Although rosy retrospection is a cognitive bias, which distorts a
   person's view of reality to some extent, some people theorize that it
   may in part serve a useful purpose in increasing self-esteem and a
   person's overall sense of well-being. For example, Terence Mitchell and
   Leigh Thompson mention this possibility in a chapter entitled "A Theory
   of Temporal Adjustments of the Evaluation of Events"^[2] in a book of
   collected research reports from various authors entitled "Advances in
   Managerial Cognition and Organizational Information Processing".^[3]

   Simplifications and exaggerations of memories (such as occurs in rosy
   retrospection) may also make it easier for people's brains to store
   long-term memories, as removing details may reduce the burden of those
   memories on the brain and make the brain require fewer neural
   connections to form and engrain memories.^[citation needed] Mnemonics,
   psychological chunking, and subconscious distortions of memories may in
   part serve a similar purpose: memory compression by way of
   simplification. Data compression in computers works on similar
   principles: compression algorithms tend to either (1) remove
   unnecessary details from data or (2) reframe the details in a simpler
   way from which the data can subsequently be reconstructed as needed, or
   (3) both. Much the same can be said of human memories and the human
   brain's own process of memorization. Another reason could be that
   humans fear the unknown so that we often assume a situation will be
   worse than it ends up being.

   In English, the idiom "rose-colored glasses" or "rose-tinted glasses"
   is also sometimes used to refer to the phenomenon of rosy
   retrospection. Usually this idiom occurs as some variation of the
   phrase "seeing things through rose-tinted glasses" or some other
   roughly similar phrasing.^[citation needed]

   Rosy retrospection is also related to the concept of declinism, such as
   people saying "things were better in the old days" or "back in my
   day...". Declinism is particularly the predisposition, caused by
   cognitive biases such as rosy retrospection, to view the past more
   favourably and the future more negatively.^[4]^[5]^[6]
   [ ]

Contents

     * 1 Research
     * 2 See also
     * 3 References
     * 4 Further reading

Research[edit]

   In one group of experiments, three groups going on different vacations
   were interviewed before, during, and after their vacations. Most
   followed the pattern of initially positive anticipation, followed by
   mild disappointment thereafter. Generally, most subjects reviewed the
   events more favorably some time after the events had occurred than they
   did while experiencing them.^[7]

See also[edit]

     * Emotion and memory
     * List of cognitive biases
     * Hindsight bias
     * Memory
     * Optimism bias
     * Positivity effect
     * Reference class forecasting
     * Nostalgia
     * Declinism
     * Pollyanna principle

References[edit]

    1. ^ "The Meaning of Nostalgia". Psychology Today. Retrieved
       2017-04-22.
    2. ^ "A Theory of Temporal Adjustments of the Evaluation of Events"
       (PDF). MIT. Retrieved 2017-04-22.
    3. ^ "Rosy Retrospection: A Psychological Phenomenon". Southeastern
       University. 2016-02-23. Retrieved 2017-04-22.
    4. ^ The Oxford Dictionary of American Political Slang edited by Grant
       Barrett, p. 90.
    5. ^ Etchells, Pete (January 16, 2015). "Declinism: is the world
       actually getting worse?". The Guardian. Retrieved 20 December 2016.
    6. ^ Steven R. Quartz, The State Of The World Isn't Nearly As Bad As
       You Think, Edge Foundation, Inc., retrieved 2016-02-17
    7. ^ Terence R. Mitchell; Leigh Thompson; Erika Peterson; Randy Cronk
       (1997). "Temporal Adjustments in the Evaluation of Events: The
       "Rosy View"". Journal of Experimental Social Psychology. 33 (4):
       421–448. doi:10.1006/jesp.1997.1333. PMID 9247371.

Further reading[edit]

     *

   Mitchell, T.; Thompson, L. (1994). "A theory of temporal adjustments of
   the evaluation of events: Rosy Prospection &amp; Rosy Retrospection" (PDF).
   In Stubbart, C.; Porac, J.; Meindl, J. (eds.). Advances in managerial
   cognition and organizational information-processing. Vol. 5. Greenwich,
   CT: JAI press. pp. 85–114. ISBN 978-1-55938-447-6. Archived (PDF) from
   the original on 2015-12-02.
     * v
     * t
     * e

   Biases
   Cognitive biases
     * Actor–observer
     * Acquiescence
     * Ambiguity
     * Anchoring
     * Attentional
     * Attribution
     * Authority
     * Automation
     * Belief
     * Blind spot
     * Choice-supportive
     * Confirmation
     * Compassion fade
     * Congruence
     * Courtesy
     * Cultural
     * Distinction
     * Dunning–Kruger
     * Egocentric
          + Curse of knowledge
     * Emotional
     * Extrinsic incentives
     * Fading affect
     * Framing
     * Frequency
     * Correspondence
     * Halo effect
     * Hindsight
     * Horn effect
     * Hostile attribution
     * Impact
     * Implicit
     * In-group
     * Mere-exposure effect
     * Negativity
     * Normalcy
     * Omission
     * Optimism
     * Out-group homogeneity
     * Outcome
     * Overton window
     * Precision
     * Present
     * Pro-innovation
     * Response
     * Restraint
     * Self-serving
     * Social comparison
     * Social influence bias
     * Status quo
     * Time-saving
     * Trait ascription
     * Turkey illusion
     * von Restorff effect
     * Zero-risk
     * In animals

   Statistical biases

     * Estimator
     * Forecast
     * Healthy user
     * Information
          + Psychological
     * Lead time
     * Length time
     * Non-response
     * Observer
     * Omitted-variable
     * Participation
     * Recall
     * Sampling
     * Selection
     * Self-selection
     * Social desirability
     * Spectrum
     * Survivorship
     * Systematic error
     * Systemic
     * Verification
     * Wet

   Other biases

     * Academic
     * Funding
     * FUTON
     * Inductive
     * Infrastructure
     * Inherent
     * In education
     * Media
          + False balance
          + Vietnam War
          + Norway
          + South Asia
          + Sweden
          + United States
          + Arab–Israeli conflict
          + Ukraine
     * Net
     * Political bias
     * Publication
     * Reporting
     * White hat

   Bias reduction

     * Cognitive bias mitigation
     * Debiasing
     * Heuristics in judgment and decision-making

   Lists: General · Memory

     * v
     * t
     * e

   Human memory

   Basic concepts

     * Encoding
     * Storage
     * Recall

     * Attention
     * Consolidation
     * Neuroanatomy

   Types

   Sensory
     * Echoic
     * Eidetic
     * Eyewitness
     * Haptic
     * Iconic
     * Motor learning
     * Visual

   Short-term
     * "The Magical Number Seven, Plus or Minus Two"
     * Working memory

   Long-term
     * Active recall
     * Autobiographical
     * Explicit
          + Declarative
          + Episodic
          + Semantic
     * Flashbulb
     * Hyperthymesia
     * Implicit
     * Meaningful learning
     * Personal-event
     * Procedural
     * Rote learning
     * Selective retention
     * Tip of the tongue

   Forgetting

     * Amnesia
          + anterograde
          + childhood
          + post-traumatic
          + psychogenic
          + retrograde
          + selective
          + transient global
     * Decay theory
     * Forgetting curve
     * Interference theory
     * Memory inhibition
     * Motivated forgetting
     * Repressed memory
     * Retrieval-induced forgetting
     * Weapon focus

   Memory errors

     * Confabulation
     * Cryptomnesia
     * Hindsight bias
     * Imagination inflation
     * Memory biases
     * Memory conformity
     * Misattribution of memory
     * Misinformation effect
     * Source-monitoring error

   False memory

     * Deese–Roediger–McDermott paradigm
     * False memory syndrome
     * Memory implantation
          + Lost in the mall technique
     * Recovered-memory therapy

   Research methods

     * Exceptional memory
     * Indirect tests of memory
     * Memory disorder

   In groups

     * Collective memory
          + Politics of memory
     * Cultural memory
     * Memory and social interactions
     * Memory conformity
     * Transactive memory

   Other topics

     * Aging
     * Art of memory
          + chunking
          + mnemonic
     * Effects of alcohol
     * Effects of exercise
     * Emotion
     * Memory improvement
     * Sleep
     * Trauma

   In society

     * Memory sport
          + World Memory Championships
     * Shas Pollak

   Related

     * Absent-mindedness
     * Atkinson–Shiffrin memory model
     * Context-dependent &amp; state-dependent memory
     * Childhood memory
     * Exosomatic memory
     * Free recall
     * Intermediate-term memory
     * Involuntary memory
          + flashbacks
     * Levels of Processing model
     * Metamemory
     * Muscle memory
     * Priming
          + intertrial
     * Prospective &amp; retrospective memory
     * The Seven Sins of Memory

   People

   Researchers
     * Richard C. Atkinson
     * Robert A. Bjork
     * Stephen J. Ceci
     * Susan Clancy
     * Hermann Ebbinghaus
     * Sigmund Freud
     * Patricia Goldman-Rakic
     * Ivan Izquierdo
     * Marcia K. Johnson
     * Eric Kandel
     * Elizabeth Loftus
     * Geoffrey Loftus
     * James McGaugh
     * Eleanor Maguire
     * George Armitage Miller
     * Brenda Milner
     * Lynn Nadel
     * Henry L. Roediger III
     * Daniel Schacter
     * Richard Shiffrin
     * Arthur P. Shimamura
     * Larry Squire
     * Susumu Tonegawa
     * Anne Treisman
     * Endel Tulving
     * Robert Stickgold

   Patients
     * HM
     * KC
     * Clive Wearing

   Other
     * Jonathan Hancock
     * Paul R. McHugh
     * Dominic O'Brien
     * Ben Pridmore
     * Cosmos Rossellius
     * Andriy Slyusarchuk

     *  Psychology portal
     *  Philosophy portal

   Retrieved from
   "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rosy_retrospection&amp;oldid=11
   08798518"

   Categories:
     * Cognitive biases
     * Memory biases
     * Nostalgia

   Hidden categories:
     * Articles with short description
     * Short description is different from Wikidata
     * Articles needing additional references from July 2019
     * All articles needing additional references
     * Articles containing Latin-language text
     * All articles with unsourced statements
     * Articles with unsourced statements from July 2019

Navigation menu

Personal tools

     * Not logged in
     * Talk
     * Contributions
     * Create account
     * Log in

Namespaces

     * Article
     * Talk

   [ ] English

Views

     * Read
     * Edit
     * View history

   [ ] More

   ____________________ Search Go

Navigation

     * Main page
     * Contents
     * Current events
     * Random article
     * About Wikipedia
     * Contact us
     * Donate

Contribute

     * Help
     * Learn to edit
     * Community portal
     * Recent changes
     * Upload file

Tools

     * What links here
     * Related changes
     * Upload file
     * Special pages
     * Permanent link
     * Page information
     * Cite this page
     * Wikidata item

Print/export

     * Download as PDF
     * Printable version

Languages

     * Español
     * Italiano
     * Pälzisch
     * Português

   Edit links

     * This page was last edited on 6 September 2022, at 09:27 (UTC).
     * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
       License 3.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you
       agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a
       registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a
       non-profit organization.

     * Privacy policy
     * About Wikipedia
     * Disclaimers
     * Contact Wikipedia
     * Mobile view
     * Developers
     * Statistics
     * Cookie statement

     * Wikimedia Foundation
     * Powered by MediaWiki
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-16">
<text>
   IFRAME: //www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-WH9FTL

   skip to main content

   Keep your benefits and access to leading information – renew your APA
   membership.

     * APA.org
     * APA Style
     * APA Services
     * Divisions

     * About APA
     * Events
     * Join APA

     * Help
     * MyAPA
     * (Log Out)
     * Log In
     * Cart

   American Psychological Association Logo American Psychological
   Association Logo
   Menu

   [Entire Site____]
   ____________________

     Members
     Topics
     Publications &amp; Databases
     Science
     Education &amp; Career
     News &amp; Advocacy
     About APA
     Events
     Join APA
     Help

   Home // News &amp; Advocacy // Podcasts // Speaking of Psychology //
   Speaking of Psychology: Does nostalgia...

Speaking of Psychology: Does nostalgia have a psychological purpose?

Episode 93 – Does Nostalgia Have a Psychological Purpose?

   What psychological purpose does nostalgia serve? Is it good or bad? Are
   we more nostalgic today in our hectic, connected world? Is there such a
   thing as the “good ‘ol days”? Here to help explain is Krystine Batcho,
   PhD, professor of psychology at LeMoyne College in Syracuse, New York.
   She’s an expert on nostalgia and developed the Nostalgia Inventory, a
   survey that assesses proneness to personal nostalgia.

About the expert: Krystine Batcho, PhD

   Krystine Batcho, PhD Krystine Batcho, PhD, is a professor of psychology
   at LeMoyne College and a licensed psychologist. She makes regular
   contributions as an expert on the Psychology Today website. Her
   research has ranged from early work in human-computer interaction to
   the impact of higher education on the development of moral and social
   responsibility. Her current research on the psychology of nostalgia
   began with her introduction of the Nostalgia Inventory, a survey that
   assesses proneness to personal nostalgia. The Nostalgia Inventory has
   been translated into multiple languages, made available as an app and
   has been used in numerous research studies. Her scholarly publications
   have been widely cited, and she is frequently interviewed by the media
   on topics of current interest, including the impact of social media.
   She teaches courses in cognitive psychology, learning, and decision
   making and mentors student research.

Streaming Audio

   IFRAME:
   //html5-player.libsyn.com/embed/episode/id/11755613/height/90/theme/cus
   tom/thumbnail/no/direction/backward/render-playlist/no/custom-color/87A
   93A/

Video

   IFRAME: https://www.youtube.com/embed/T_NulVf7YqA?rel=0&amp;showinfo=0

Transcript

   Kaitlin Luna: Hello and welcome to Speaking of Psychology , a biweekly
   podcast from the American Psychological Association that explores the
   connections between psychological science and everyday life. I'm your
   host, Kaitlin Luna.

   Nostalgia, that longing feeling for the past when things seemed better,
   easier, and more fun. It's the feeling behind countless number one
   hits. It's what's resurrecting old TV shows and being capitalized on by
   politicians. We all know the feeling. Some of us maybe a little too
   well. What psychological purpose does nostalgia serve? Is it good or
   bad? Are we more nostalgic today in our hectic connected world? Is
   there such a thing as the good old days? Here to help explain is Dr.
   Krystine Batcho, professor of psychology at LeMoyne College in
   Syracuse, New York. She's an expert on nostalgia and develops the
   nostalgia inventory, a survey that assesses proneness to personal
   nostalgia. Welcome, Dr. Batcho.

   Dr. Krystine Batcho: Thank you so much. I love talking about nostalgia.
   Thank you for inviting me.

   Luna: Absolutely. Absolutely, we look forward to hearing all about it.
   As a psychologist and a researcher of nostalgia, how do you describe
   nostalgia?

   Batcho: That's a very important question because today many people are
   researching nostalgia, but they might be using the word differently. In
   fact, some people are probably talking about a slightly different
   experience or construct. I'm pretty faithful to the origins of the word
   nostalgia. The word was coined or invented a long time ago, over 300
   years ago, and originally designated homesickness. Well, semantic drift
   over the centuries has broadened that to the notion of longing for or
   missing aspects of a person's personal lived past. That is the kind of
   nostalgia or that is what I mean when I talk about nostalgia and it's a
   wonderfully complex paradoxical experience.

   Luna: Can you talk about the role of nostalgia in the human psyche. Why
   do we have that feeling?

   Batcho: Most of the research available today including my research
   argues that nostalgia serves a number of functions. The thing that ties
   them all together is that nostalgia is an emotional experience that
   unifies. One example of this is it helps to unite our sense of who we
   are, our self, our identity over time. Because over time we change
   constantly we change in incredible ways. We're not anywhere near the
   same as we were when we were three years old, for example. Nostalgia by
   motivating us to remember the past in our own life helps to unite us to
   that authentic self and remind us of who we have been and then compare
   that to who we feel we are today.

   That gives us a sense of who we want to be down the road in the future.
   The other way that nostalgia serves an essential psychological function
   is that it is a highly social emotion. It connects us to other people.
   It does that and so many beautiful ways. In the beginning, when we're
   very young, it's part of what bonds us to the most important people in
   our life, our parents, our siblings, our friends. As we go through
   life, it can broaden out and extend to a wider sphere of the people we
   interact with. It's a social connectedness phenomenon and nostalgia is
   in that sense a very healthy pro-social emotion.

   The other way that it's unifying is that it helps us to unify what
   otherwise would be felt or experienced by us as conflicts. In itself,
   it is somewhat of a conflict because as I define it is a bitter-sweet
   emotion. It's sweet because we're remembering the best times, the good
   times of our life. The bitterness comes from the sense that we know for
   sure that we can never really regain them, they're gone forever. The
   irreversibility of time means that we absolutely cannot go back in time
   so it helps us to deal with the conflict of the bitter longing for what
   can never be again together with the sweetness of having experienced it
   and being able to revisit it and relive it again.

   Luna: You've explained that there's two different kinds of nostalgia.
   There's the personal which we've just touched on and historical. Can
   you explain what each one is?

   Batcho: In fact today, many people are arguing that there are even more
   varieties of nostalgia but when I first began collecting empirical
   evidence in the mid-1990s, I knew that another inventory existed. It
   was put together by a psychologist named Holbrook. That one contained
   items that were more oriented toward history and society across the
   years. That is the type that I refer to as historical nostalgia. The
   evidence shows that someone who experiences historical nostalgia might
   even have an emotional attachment to or longing for times in history
   that predate their own birth. That is very different from personal
   nostalgia.

   Personal nostalgia means that you are longing for or feeling good about
   aspects of your life that you already live through and have stored in
   your memory. My original data, in the beginning, demonstrated that
   individuals can be experiencing a lot of one type of the nostalgia and
   maybe not much of the other. They're relatively non-correlated or
   independent phenomena. They're not the same thing.

   Luna: Your research has shown that nostalgia can be a stabilizing force
   and comfort us during times of change and transition. Can you explain
   that a bit more?

   Batcho: Yes, change whether it's good change or negative change. We
   know that it's stressful. It's very difficult to grasp change, because
   in some sense, at a very deep psychic level, change threatens us. It's
   a little frightening because we're not 100% sure that we can control
   it. One of the most important aspects of being a healthy human being is
   having a sense that you are in control of things. When things start to
   change, either very substantially, such as major events in a person's
   life, getting married or getting divorced, getting a new career, going
   back to school or graduating from school, it's comforting to have a
   nostalgic feeling for the past that reminds us that although we don't
   know what the future is going to bring, what we do know is that we know
   who we have been and who we really are.

   It's a very comforting emotion. It also brings back; it stimulates
   memories of the times when we were accepted and loved unconditionally.
   That is such a powerfully comforting phenomenon, knowing that there was
   a time in life when we didn't have to earn our love, or we didn't
   deserve it because we earned a certain amount of money or we were
   successful in a certain venue. Our parents, for example, or our
   siblings or our friends simply loved us unconditionally. That is a
   wonderfully comforting feeling when we're undergoing any kind of
   turmoil in our personal lives.

   Luna: When you're going through a difficult experience or a new change,
   as you mentioned, you might find yourself thinking a lot about memories
   from the past, is that correct to say?

   Batcho: Absolutely. For instance, many people will tell you that if
   they're at a major event, graduation, a wedding, christening for a
   baby, very often what is happening is they have an entire flood of
   their mind with all the nostalgic memories that come to be relevant to
   this situation. When a parent is sitting in the audience, and they
   watch their child graduate, they cannot help but remember when that
   child was little and needed help putting their shoes on and thinking
   how far that person has come in life.

   In a way, Nostalgia is like a measurement. It's a way we keep track of
   things, we monitor progress through life, not just for ourselves, but
   even for other people to whom we are very attached.

   Luna: I want to flip that on the other side a bit and talk about
   today's political climate where many people are longing to return to
   "the good old days" in the United States. What does this say to you as
   a nostalgia researcher?

   Batcho: It tells me a couple of things. First of all, different people
   have that kind of sense of wishing for the good old days for different
   reasons. Let's say, someone who is old enough to have lived through,
   for example, the 1950s, they might actually be experiencing some
   personal nostalgia because they're remembering how they and their
   family celebrated holidays, or what it was like going to school in the
   mid-1950s. That phenomenon would be very, very different for a younger
   person, for example, a member of the millennial generation. For them,
   it's not personal nostalgia, it's historical. Historical nostalgia, in
   my research, suggests is more likely triggered by dissatisfaction with
   the present.

   If people are unhappy for any reason with how things are today, they're
   more likely then to experience this sense that things must have been
   better in the past. How far they have to go in terms of their longing
   can depend upon how much they know about history. Some of this gets
   handed down through stories from grandparents and some of it gets
   handed down through films that people watch or even literature that
   they've read. Someone could, for example, become enamored of a period
   in history such as Victorian days, not because they've lived through
   them, obviously, but because they have become romanticized and
   idealized in a way in literature and in film.

   That kind of phenomenon is very, very different from someone who says,
   I think that today is a very stressful time, and when I was growing up,
   I think it was less stressful. The reason for that is because our
   memories are not faithful. They're not accurate to what things really
   were like. They're our impressions of what things were like in the
   past.

   Luna: You want to expand on a little bit more. Do you think people are
   remembering the, quote, good old days accurately because a lot of you
   might say your life is worse, and this is the United States speaking
   of, it's worse than it was 60 years ago, in the 1950s are glamorizes
   being this ideal moment in time probably immortalized in a show like
   Leave It to Beaver or something like that. When you think about that,
   the experience of the 1950s of some people in America was probably
   wonderful, but the experience of other people at that time was probably
   terrible.

   I'm thinking were white Americans experienced 1950s in one way. People
   of color experienced it in a totally different way. Women experienced
   it in one way, men experience another. Can you talk a little bit more
   about that like are we overly romanticizing that period of time in this
   country today?

   Batcho: That is an excellent question. We have decades of cognitive
   research that show that the general default is that memories are not
   accurate, and that's true for all kinds of memories. When we think
   about retrieving memories, for example, if we want to retrieve what do
   we remember about the 1950s or whatever period in history that we've
   lived through, we can be very selective. When you think about a time
   period in society, it has so many components to it. One individual
   might be nostalgic for that time, but they're not thinking about things
   like racism or discrimination or even conflict. For example, the baby
   boomers, some of them were hippies during the 1960s, and when they get
   nostalgic for Woodstock, they might not be really thinking about the
   anti-war protests and some of the violence that occurred at that time.
   They're selecting out the parts of that. They might be thinking about,
   oh, I had wonderful friendships then or they might be thinking about
   some of their early romantic relationships.

   We pick and choose. The memory process not only is selective, but it
   also distorts to some extent. We do idealize things on occasion. By the
   way, this is a two-edged sword because just as we can idealize and
   romanticize and therefore distort the accuracy of memories, we can go
   in the other direction. One of the reasons I find nostalgia so
   fascinating is because I have an interest in connecting the theoretical
   research in the laboratory to people's lived experiences because of
   clinical applications.

   Some people find that their memories tend to go the other direction
   when they're remembering the past. They're always thinking of the
   negative aspects. Then they might distort that and say, "Oh, as a
   child, my parents didn't love me. They didn't give me toys. They were
   very mean to me. My friends bullied me," but actually, if we had a
   videotape of their childhoods, we might find that that's not
   necessarily totally accurate. Their childhood might not have been any
   different from their siblings' childhood. That makes us ask a question.
   Then why are some individuals selectively romanticizing the past
   whereas others are actually exaggerating its negative aspects?

   That led me in the early research that I did to look at generations to
   some extent. I was interested in looking at the greatest generation,
   many of whom grew up as children during the Great Depression. I
   interviewed people who had experienced quite a bit of financial
   hardship. When they talked about their memories of their childhood,
   they, in fact, did talk about only being able to eat bread on many
   days. That idea that they recognize that their childhood was one of
   deprivation, one of hardship, you might say, does that factor into how
   nostalgic they would be then for those days? The answer to that is much
   more complicated than I thought it would be. I thought that those
   individuals would have the least amount of nostalgia. It turns out that
   it probably depends upon two things.

   One is an individual's personality or their psychological well-being in
   the first place. If you have two individuals one of whom is really
   happy in their current life and they're emotionally doing just fine.
   They might go back and remember bad things and then laugh about them
   and say wow we've come a long way since those days haven't, we. Now we
   have a big Thanksgiving feast and we have all this food. I remember
   being six years old not having enough to eat. Whereas someone else who
   is suffering from something like depression or an anxiety disorder.
   They might go back and think about the past and then let that further
   sadden them rather than make them happy by comparison with how far
   they've come.

   Luna: That's really fascinating. One thing I do my touch a little bit
   more to like, why do we remember something so positively something so
   negatively? Because you say it might depend on the person's mental
   state, how they're doing in life. It's just so fascinating how we can
   look back on an experience and say, even if it was bad you can go back
   and look at an experience and focus on the positive aspects of it.

   Batcho: Yes, exactly. That is fascinating. I think that there are at
   least two levels at which you can ask that question. One level is when
   someone is sitting in private just reminiscing. There it is very
   important to think about their current mood state. Because we have mood
   dependent memory effects. When you're sad, you're more likely to think
   of sad memories. When you're happy, you're more likely to think of
   happy memories. On the other level, we have a social element and
   establish it is a social experience. If you're hanging out with friends
   and reminiscing about the days back in high school or college or
   whatever. Now, depending upon what your friends say in that social
   setting that might trigger you to either be more positive or more
   negative. In a way, one really good piece of advice is for people who
   are starting to feel stressed out or lonely, or sad.

   It's very important to try to gravitate toward people who stimulate the
   best of what you can bring to today from your past. In other words, if
   someone is always bringing you down by saying, "Do you remember when we
   didn't have enough to eat? Do you remember when somebody was unkind to
   us?" That person is an influence on our memory retrieval processes and
   we're more likely then to experience nostalgia in a negative way. On
   the other hand, if you're hanging out with people who are laughing
   about the funny times and the times when something embarrassing
   happened, everyone loves to share their most embarrassing moment. In
   that social setting when it's jovial and people are feeling good about
   it and finding the lessons learned from it. Now, that might bring out
   the best of nostalgic memory.

   Luna: It's interesting that a lot of it is dependent upon humans around
   you. That's really interesting.

   Batcho: Yes, it is. I think it's of great importance today because some
   of the current survey data have suggested that especially for the
   millennial generation and other adults, there is a great deal of
   reported loneliness. Some people suspect that has a little bit to do,
   not entirely but a little bit to do with the Internet or cyberspace and
   social media. The argument is there are 24 hours in a day. How do you
   spend those hours? People who grew up before the Internet their days
   were spent largely either alone or with other people face to face.
   That's no longer the case. We have an incredible amount of time spent
   in cyberspace. Even when you're connecting to other people in a social
   way, you're connecting to them at a distance. I believe that the
   psychological distancing can make people feel lonelier than they would
   have felt had they spent exactly the same amount of time having a cup
   of coffee with that person face to face. I think that the social
   element needs to be explored and researched even more heavily given the
   great proportion of time that young adults are spending, not in actual
   face to face, but in virtual reality.

   Luna: Yes. There's so many throwbacks, if you will, happening today
   like I'm talking about the TV shows that are being rebooted or were
   popular in the '90s bands from long ago have reunited and are going out
   on tour. There's places like Buzzfeed often feature, top 20 lists like
   top 20 toys from the 1980s that sort of thing. People really flock to
   that and want to share their memories of certain toy. I was wondering
   from your perspective, what that tells us about people today. Is it
   really because of we're hyper-connected all the time or could it be
   people are more nostalgic today is that we have access to sharing these
   memories with a lot of people all at once through the internet?

   Batcho: That is a complicated question and I think there are several
   reasons for the retro-phenomenon that has become somewhat of a fad. I
   think on one level it tells us based upon the research that there's
   something people feel is missing in the current lifestyle and that what
   is missing might be this social connectedness up close and personal. On
   the other hand, it might be that people are losing track of their sense
   of purpose and meaning and the nostalgia, one of its healthiest
   functions is to keep us on track with regard to the meaningfulness of
   our lives.

   Data suggests that nostalgia facilitates our understanding of meaning
   in life and so in a way when we look at all the reboots and people
   going back to the past, it might be telling us that people aren't 100%
   satisfied with the current lifestyle. There's something that might be
   missing on a much more pragmatic, lower level. You might argue that a
   lot of this is because we can suddenly, it has become so accessible
   with social media. All it takes is for one person to post something
   from the past and raise a question. Judy, do you remember watching this
   old TV show or I wonder whatever happened to and before. What, it can
   go viral and we have the technology now to really immerse people in
   these reboots and then spin-offs, et cetera.

   Until it stops making profit, I think we're going to see this for a
   while. I don't think it's going to continue on unabated, however.

   Luna: Is there some element of infectiousness to nostalgia? I mean, we
   talked about obviously people have more access to seeing these things
   online and they can share it, but even people, if they're physically
   together, does it become something that spreads from one person to the
   other?

   Batcho: I believe it can be actually. I wish it were more infectious.
   I'll tell you what I mean by that. I think is infectious when you have
   a group of people who have some shared experience. The best example of
   that are when a group of friends are reminiscing about their antics,
   the things they did as either teenagers or children or what have you.
   There it's a bonding experience. Another example of that is we know
   from current research that sports fans love to do that. They talk about
   the games that they enjoyed and when their team was victorious. When
   you have a common bond, it can be very infectious and it's like a
   domino one memory triggers another.

   The reason why I say I wish it were more infectious is because that can
   break down when you have a group of people who do not have shared
   experiences to be nostalgic about. Suddenly if you have one individual
   wanting to reminisce about his or her own past experiences, but no one
   else in that group remembers those things or lived through those
   things. In, a long time ago people talked about generation gaps.
   Someone is talking about the 1950s a millennial says, Oh, I don't even
   know what you're talking about. I don't know that TV show.

   I never saw that this can actually alienate other people because people
   don't necessarily want to hear about your nostalgic memories. They want
   to share their own. That's why I say I wish it were a little more open
   because we have so much to learn from one another's nostalgic memories.
   That's why I encourage people when they find themselves in a situation
   such as you're reminiscing about your past and other people start
   drifting away because they're bored, you might start asking them about
   theirs and start a conversation, a dialogue. In that sense, you can
   broaden it out a little more.

   Luna: Can this nostalgia be a destructive force that can really
   incubate anger, isolation or hatred? It seems like it could have that
   potential

   Batcho: Most of the research suggests that nostalgia is aligned with or
   correlated with very soft, pro-social emotions such as compassion,
   empathy, altruism. It's unlikely, generally, to be associated with
   hostility or anger. Can it be isolating? That's a very interesting
   question because you could argue that if you find yourself, the victim
   of or a survivor of very unique circumstances and now you're nostalgic
   for a time before that, other people might not be able to relate to
   you. You might or might not have the motivation to leave your past
   behind.

   That led me to doing the qualitative analysis of memoirs of people, who
   had survived under wartime conditions. What's particularly interesting
   to me is that, when those individuals recount how they had to adapt to
   significant change. In some cases became relocated, not by their own
   choice but because of conditions of war. They became, for example,
   refugees or they had to emigrate. Initially, in the early stages, they
   almost had a psychic block against accepting a new culture, a new life.
   They almost wallowed in their nostalgic memories of the past and found
   as time went on that that became very isolating. Because the people
   they were among, were not able to share that.

   What leads ultimately to a healthy kind of nostalgia is the one where
   the positive pro-social aspects of nostalgia can reconnect us now. Not
   just to people in our past but to the people we're dealing with today.
   That is possible, that can happen. All the memoirs that I've studied,
   have demonstrated how that happens. It happens by confronting the past
   with the current situation in trying to find what were the lessons we
   learned from our past that we can now tweak, update, customize and use
   to cope with the turmoil and the conflict in the change that we've gone
   through to sort of be more optimistic towards the future.

   The other aspect of this is that some people are looking at what they
   might refer to as social nostalgia and looking at groups and having
   designs where they're comparing intra-group versus inter-group. In
   those situations, you're perhaps talking about a slightly different
   phenomenon.

   Luna: Can nostalgia hold us back by keeping us dwelling on the past?
   Can it really impede what is happening in the current moment and in the
   future?

   Batcho: When I began collecting data, that was the prevailing belief
   among theorists. Before people started collecting empirical evidence,
   it was just assumed. In fact, much of the psychoanalytic thought that
   predated behaviorism and modern or contemporary social science argued
   that it would be regressive try to revisit your past. That the danger
   was that if your past is better than your present, why would you not
   just then stay there? Well, once I began collecting data and then other
   people, of course, have extended this even worldwide, what we find is
   that generally speaking, that is not what happens.

   I've thought a great deal about this and most of the research I've
   covered it looks like this. Nostalgia is bittersweet. Why did it evolve
   that way? If you take a social evolutionary perspective, it would make
   perfect sense that we would want to revisit our past so that we always
   learn from it. At the same time, we don't want to stay in the past. The
   sweetness entices us to revisit our past. Once we're there, the
   bitterness of knowing that actually it no longer exists reminds us that
   we must return to the present. That makes us want to return to the
   present.

   My argument is that it's almost never, at least the research suggests
   it would be extremely unlikely for someone to want to remain in the
   past. If someone found themselves being trapped in the past, that
   suggests that they're experiencing some sort of difficulty. It could be
   that they're undergoing a very intolerable current situation in their
   life and they might seek counseling to help them deal with that because
   they're using nostalgia then or their memories as an escape. For the
   most part, most people my research shows, because nostalgia is a social
   emotion it is actually correlated with or associated with healthy
   coping mechanisms such as seeking out others when they're having
   difficulties. We, in fact, when we revisit our memories, we try to
   remember how other people in our lives solved problems in the past and
   then use that as a role model for how we want to solve the problems
   we're experiencing today so it's generally healthy.

   Luna: How does age affect a person's feelings of nostalgia? Is it
   across the board or is it older or younger people?

   Batcho: My original data set suggested that there is a bump in
   nostalgia where it peaks not in old age as many theorists would have
   expected but peaks in young adulthood. Most theorists argue that the
   reason for that increase in nostalgia during young adulthood is because
   it's such a pivotal developmental transitional period. It is literally
   the time when a person has one foot still back in their childhood and
   one foot anticipating their move into complete adult independence.

   While they have a little bit of their identity still aligned with or
   connected to their past, they are eager to forge ahead and for that
   reason, there is a lot more frequency of nostalgic reminiscence going
   on because there's a bit over reluctance out of trepidation. Will my
   future be as wonderful and as rosy as my past was? We know that
   transitional periods including developmental ones trigger nostalgia.

   Some newer research is suggesting that there might be a smaller but
   another bump in older individuals and that is because they're watching
   a significant change in their own lifestyle from when they were for
   example in terms of physical well-being or physical health completely
   in the prime of their health versus looking ahead toward aging as well
   I might not be able to be as active as I once had been or maybe they're
   suffering with physical conditions or disorders that limit some of
   their lifestyles. For that reason, they would also become more
   nostalgic.

   Luna: Do you think nostalgia has always been a part of the human
   experience?

   Batcho: When I first did literature review in order to put together my
   nostalgia inventory, I was really impressed to find references to
   nostalgia before it ever had the name nostalgia and those references go
   back thousands of years. You can find in literature all kinds of
   examples of people who were in some sense nostalgic for sometimes their
   home or their homeland and that fits the original definition of it as
   homesickness but also in terms of longing for the past and therefore
   the argument is that it's universal. It probably is part of the human
   experience, so it's always been there as a potential. It cuts across
   all cultures and all historical time periods.

   Luna: That's really fascinating. Also can you just-- Now you've touched
   on it a few times, can you explain your nostalgia inventory and how you
   use it in your research?

   Batcho: Yes, because I define nostalgia as a longing for or missing for
   one's personal past, I comprised it of items that asked people to what
   extent they missed something from their past. Some of the items on the
   inventory are really conceptual or abstract such as missing the
   innocence of childhood or missing the freedom from having
   responsibilities. Others are more concrete missing your toys, missing
   pets that you had in your former days and it turns out that there
   really are probably two factors within it.

   One which is a more concrete set of things that we miss from our past
   and the other being a little more abstract a little more conceptual and
   I argue that nostalgia is an umbrella that covers both of those. My
   inventory measures it in a way that connects people to missing their
   own past and that is not correlated with inventories that look at it
   more as a historical type of experience or social event.

   Luna: I might also go back to where we're talking a little bit more
   about the memories, how they can be both positive and negative.

   Batcho: Yes.

   Luna: In a previous episode, we did Episode 91 how memory can be
   manipulated. We featured memory expert, Dr. Elizabeth Loftus. She
   explained that memories can be manipulated under the right conditions.
   What are your thoughts on that and how that can affect our levels of
   nostalgia about the past?

   Batcho: I agree. I agree completely. I think that to some extent, how
   we interpret our past, how we comprehend, can change. We can have
   retrospective comprehension or interpretation of our memories. That
   depends upon what purpose we're trying to serve in our present. If
   someone is trying to find a reason to feel loved or worthy of love,
   then they might have a guided sense through their own historic memories
   of looking for the times when they were loved. Maybe even doing an
   analysis of. I wonder if something went wrong or was I partly
   responsible or two, I just have bad luck?

   A good example of that would be if someone is undergoing a breakup of
   an important relationship. Now, they might be motivated to have
   nostalgic memories either of that relationship and saying, gee, how did
   we come to this unhappiness when we were so passionately in love in the
   beginning? There are researchers now looking at relationship nostalgia.
   It can be helpful to some extent but on the other hand, if you're using
   it as a way of almost arguing that you want out of the relationship.
   You say, "Well, the reason why I am leaving this relationship is
   because when I compare my satisfaction with it today, with how much joy
   I got out of it in the beginning, I see that it's been all downhill."

   I'm arguing here that our motivations can actually influence how we
   remember the past and how we interpret the meaningfulness of our past.

   Luna: Just to wrap this up for our listeners. We've touched on a lot of
   different areas of nostalgia. I want to know, is there a way for
   society to collectively use nostalgia to better itself? How can we
   tangibly benefit from it?

   Batcho: I think it's really a very important resource and it's
   underutilized. I say that even though we have all these spin-offs and
   reboots and we have a lot of nostalgia. If you use a search engine for
   the term nostalgia, it is incredible. You can find maybe near 300
   million hits on that search engine but just because you have a lot of
   something doesn't mean that you're using it effectively. We could start
   to incorporate it more effectively, I believe. Not just in media,
   that's one great vehicle. We can also look at how we can use it in
   social media, in cyberspace, but also in education and perhaps in
   parenting.

   One of the healthiest forms of nostalgia throughout human history has
   always been to connect each generation to the next. In that sort of
   bond, you pass down to the next generation, the best of the past. Just
   because we are oriented toward progress, doesn't mean that there isn't
   something of value that we might have forgotten from the past. A good
   example of that would be to say that all the technology that has been
   developed recently, is absolutely wonderful. All the progress in
   medicine has saved so many lives. We are almost obsessed with
   future-oriented progress. The only risk that brings us is the risk of
   wondering whether we've made certain trade-offs.

   Are there things that were present before that were either not doing as
   effectively today? For example, are we helping young children develop
   empathy for others and empathy for those who are different from
   themselves as effectively as we might? There are many possible
   practical tools. It used to be that when parents had children, they
   relive their own nostalgic memories by reading children's books that
   they had read to them to their own children. Then when they became
   grandparents doing the same for their grandchildren, because the
   millennials have delayed marriage and children and family size has
   shrunk, we might be having a little bit of a deficit in those kinds of
   intergenerational transmissions.

   I think that we can learn a lot from that and wonder how we can now
   tweak that replicate it today so that we don't just look across
   generations, but we look across cultures. We look across differences of
   opinion and diverse ideologies. So, what can we find that is a common
   bond so that we can get along with one another better than perhaps some
   people think we're getting along with one another today. Because
   differences can be divisive, nostalgia could be in a way part of the
   cure because nostalgia does the opposite. Instead of dividing, it
   unites.

   Luna: There's a lot of great things that nostalgia can do for us if we
   just hone in on that and try to utilize it as you just mentioned.

   Batcho: Yes, absolutely.

   Luna: Thank you so much for joining us, Dr. Batcho. We really
   appreciate your time. It has been a really very interesting topic. I
   think our listeners will really enjoy.

   Batcho: Thank you so much. I really enjoyed it myself.

   Luna: Before we go, I want to remind you that we want to hear from you.
   You can e-mail your comments and ideas to speakingofpsychology@apa.org.
   That's speaking of psychology all one-word dot org. Please consider
   giving us a rating in iTunes, it really helps. Speaking of Psychology
   is part of the APA podcast network which includes other informative
   podcasts like APA Journals Dialogue about new psychological research
   and Progress Notes about the practice of psychology. You can find all
   of our podcasts on iTunes, Stitcher, or wherever you get your podcasts.
   You can also go to our website SpeakingofPsychology.org to listen to
   more episodes. I'm Kaitlin Luna with the American Psychological
   Association.
   Date created: November 2019
   Speaking of Psychology

Download Episode

   Episode 93: Does Nostalgia Have a Psychological Purpose?

   Save the MP3 file linked above to listen to it on your computer or
   mobile device.
   All episodes

Speaking of Psychology

   Speaking of Psychology is an audio podcast series highlighting some of
   the latest, most important, and relevant psychological research being
   conducted today.

   Produced by the American Psychological Association, these podcasts will
   help listeners apply the science of psychology to their everyday lives.

Subscribe and download via:

   Apple
   Listen to podcast on iTunes

   Stitcher
   Listen to podcast on Stitcher

   Spotify
   Listen to podcast on Spotify

About the host: Kaitlin Luna

   Kaitlin Luna was the host of Speaking of Psychology from September 2018
   to March 2020. A former broadcast journalist, she worked in APA's
   Office of Public Affairs as a public affairs manager.
   ADVERTISEMENT
   ADVERTISEMENT

Contact APA Office of Public Affairs

   Contact APA Office of Public Affairs
   Advancing psychology to benefit society and improve lives
   APA Logo
   PSYCHOLOGISTS
   Standards and Guidelines
   PsycCareers
   Divisions of APA
   Ethics
   Early Career Psychologists
   Continuing Education
   Renew Membership
   STUDENTS
   Careers in Psychology
   Accredited Psychology Programs
   More for Students
   ABOUT PSYCHOLOGY
   Science of Psychology
   Psychology Topics
   PUBLICATIONS &amp; DATABASES
   APA Style
   Journals
   Books
   Magination Press
   Videos
   APA PsycInfo
   APA PsycArticles
   More Publications &amp; Databases
   ABOUT APA
   Governance
   Directorates and Programs
   Press Room
   Advertise with Us
   Corporate Supporters
   Work at APA
   Contact Us
   More APA Websites
     * ACT Raising Safe Kids Program
     * American Psychological Foundation
     * APA Annual Convention
     * APA Services, Inc.

     * APA Merch Store
     * APA PsycNet^®
     * APA Style^®
     * Online Psychology Laboratory

   Get Involved
   Advocate
   Participate
   Donate
   Join APA
   Follow APA
   more
     * Privacy Statement
     * Terms of Use
     * Accessibility
     * Website Feedback
     * Sitemap

   © 2022 American Psychological Association
   750 First St. NE, Washington, DC 20002-4242  |  Contact Support
   Telephone: (800) 374-2721; (202) 336-5500 | TDD/TTY: (202) 336-6123
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-18">
<text>
   #alternate alternate alternate

   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-MKVW68D

   (BUTTON)
   ____________________ (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   Popular Science
   SUBSCRIBE
   LOG IN
   JOIN
   LOG IN
   (BUTTON)

     * Channels
          + POPSCI 150
          + PopSci+
          + Science
               o Archaeology
               o Ask Us Anything
               o Biology
               o Dinosaurs
               o Physics
               o Space
          + Technology
               o AI
               o Aviation
               o Engineering
               o Internet
               o Military
               o Robots
               o Security
               o Vehicles
          + Environment
               o Agriculture
               o Animals
               o Climate Change
               o Conservation
               o Energy
               o Sustainability
               o Weather
          + DIY
               o Life Skills
               o Projects
               o Tech Hacks
          + Health
               o Diseases
               o Fitness &amp; Exercise
               o Medicine
               o Nutrition
               o Psychology
          + Gear
               o Audio
               o Cameras
               o Computers
               o Fitness Gear
               o Gaming
               o Gift Guides
               o Home
               o Home Theater
               o Outdoor Gear
               o Phones
               o Tablets
               o Wearables
     * More
          + Merch
          + PopSci Shop
          + Subscriber Login
          + Podcasts
          + Video
     * FIND US ON
          + Social
               o Facebook
               o Twitter
               o LinkedIn
               o Instagram
               o Pinterest
               o Youtube
          + Flipboard
          + Apple News+
          + RSS

   SOCIAL
   Newsletter Sign-up

Popsci+

     * Subscribe
     * Log in

     * Science
          + Archaeology
          + Ask Us Anything
          + Biology
          + Dinosaurs
          + Physics
          + Space
     * Technology
          + AI
          + Aviation
          + Best of What's New
          + Engineering
          + Internet
          + Military
          + Robots
          + Security
          + Vehicles
     * Environment
          + Agriculture
          + Animals
          + Climate Change
          + Conservation
          + Energy
          + Sustainability
          + Weather
     * DIY
          + Life Skills
          + Projects
          + Tech Hacks
     * Health
          + Diseases
          + Fitness &amp; Exercise
          + Medicine
          + Nutrition
          + Psychology
     * Gear
          + Audio
          + Cameras
          + Computers
          + Fitness Gear
          + Gaming
          + Gift Guides
          + Home
          + Home Theater
          + Outdoor Gear
          + Phones
          + Tablets
          + Wearables
     * POPSCI 150
     * MERCH
     * Newsletter Sign-up

     * Health
     * Psychology

We once thought nostalgia was a disease, but it might be key to our survival

   To what end does the brain recall and reward old memories?

   By Eleanor Cummins | Published Apr 8, 2020 6:00 PM
     * Health

   cassette tape
   tk. Pexels/Miguel Á. Padriñán
   SHARE
     *
     *
     *
     *

   We’ve all felt that jab to the soul you get from driving by your old
   high school haunts or hearing a tune you once danced to. But why is
   that bittersweet sort of reminiscence so universal?

   Modern neuroscientists and psychologists know that a healthy dose of
   nostalgia is good for you, at least if you’re recalling happy days. But
   there was no sweetness to cut the bitter sensation in 1688, when
   Johannes Hofer coined the word in his medical dissertation. A
   combination of the Greek words nostos, or homecoming, and algos, or
   pain, it was a special type of homesickness associated with soldiers
   fighting far-off wars—and doctors feared it could kill.

   Seventeenth-century physicians like Hofer worried such thoughts
   depleted a patient’s “vital spirits,” draining their energy and putting
   health at risk, says Susan J. Matt, a professor of history at Weber
   State University. In the 19th century, doctors debated whether
   nostalgia was a disease in its own right or something that exacerbated
   other conditions common among troops, like dysentery. Either way, they
   believed it could cause irregular heartbeat, fever, and, in rare cases,
   death.

   Our opinion of nostalgia has evolved since then, but the phenomenon
   still eludes understanding. “It’s a very mixed emotion,” says Frederick
   Barrett, a cognitive neuroscientist at Johns Hopkins University. That
   makes it hard to shoehorn into existing psychological theory, which
   typically categorizes emotions as either positive or negative. And
   triggers—the cars, chords, or smells that blast you into the past—are
   extremely personal. When one person’s trash is another’s sentimental
   treasure, designing a standardized study is difficult.

   But we do know nostalgia has a marked effect on us: Imaging studies
   show us that these experiences have their own neural signature. In
   2016, Barrett reported that meaningful musical cues changed the
   activity of the substantia nigra, a reward processing center that makes
   the happy hormone dopamine. That same year, neuroscientists in Japan
   published their own study, which argues that the emotion is co-produced
   by the brain’s recall and reward systems. They found that nostalgic
   images tax the memory-managing hippocampus more than other sights, as
   people mine autobiographical details deep in the past. This mental
   effort pays off: As the hippocampus activates, so too does the ventral
   striatum, another of the brain’s dopaminergic reward centers.

   That longing for the past might be a protective mechanism, says Tim
   Wildschut, a professor of social and personality psychology at the
   University of Southampton in England. Since 2001, he and his colleagues
   have generated a growing body of evidence that individuals more prone
   to nostalgia are generally more likely to socialize, feel empathy, and
   find life meaningful. But their work also suggests a more primitive
   purpose for the feeling: The same neurology that makes us long for
   people and places we’ve left behind may have evolved to remind our
   ancient ancestors of pleasant physical sensations during periods of
   discomfort and pain. In a 2012 study in the journal Emotion,
   Wildschut’s team showed that lower temperatures make us more nostalgic,
   and that nostalgia makes us feel toasty even when we’re objectively
   colder—a bit of magical thinking that could help people persevere in
   situations that might otherwise feel hopeless. If remembering the
   warmth of the cave you last called home could trick you into feeling a
   little less freezing, you might just keep moving long enough to find
   shelter before your body starts to shut down.

   In the modern era of sweaters and central heating, research suggests
   that the occasional look backward can also give us a life-affirming
   boost in more-subtle ways: by increasing self-esteem and protecting
   against depression. Clay Routledge, a social psychologist at North
   Dakota State University, conducted some of the earliest experimental
   studies on reminiscing as a mechanism for emotional self-regulation.
   “We’re in this campaign for some sort of meaning in life,” Routledge
   says. When you feel anxious or inconsequential, memories can be a
   source of comfort. “These cherished experiences we’ve accumulated
   across time make our lives seem meaningful,” he says. Feeling nostalgic
   helps us access them.

   Sentimentality’s apparent power to jump-start one’s memory also seems
   to improve recall ability in people with Alzheimer’s and other forms of
   dementia. In 2011, Mary Mittelman, a researcher at New York University
   Langone Health’s department of psychiatry, founded the Unforgettables,
   a chorus for people with dementia in New York City. When the ensemble
   performs familiar tunes—think classic songs like “Ol’ Man
   River”—​participants, even some who struggle with regular speech, start
   to sing along. Some clinicians are trying to fold retro audio into
   formal dementia care, with curated playlists and personalized concerts
   put on by music therapists for patients and their families.

   New flavors of this sort of “reminiscence therapy” are emerging around
   the world. In 2018, London-based startup Virtue Health launched the
   virtual reality app LookBack, which allows headset-wearing users to
   visit memorable locations around the world, or just take a walk on a
   familiar beach. That same year, the George G. Glenner Alzheimer’s
   Family Centers opened its first Town Square, an adult daycare facility
   designed to look like a small town in 1950s America. Though LookBack
   and Town Square have yet to publish peer-reviewed data on the success
   of their programs, clients say the projects have helped seniors access
   dusty memories and reconnect with loved ones.

   Scientists need a lot more information to adequately characterize this
   complex and bittersweet human sentiment. But while centuries of doctors
   considered nostalgia a deadly disease, we now know how wrong they were:
   Our longing for a lost time can help us make it through today.

   This story appears in the Spring 2020, Origins issue of Popular
   Science.
   Psychology

   Like science, tech, and DIY projects?

   Sign up to receive Popular Science's emails and get the highlights.
   LET'S GO

   Popular Science

Links

     * Home
     * Newsletter Sign-up
     * About Popular Science
     * How We Test &amp; Review Products
     * Editorial Standards
     * Contact
     * Privacy Policy
     * Terms &amp; Conditions
     * Sitemap
     * DepositPhotos
     * Subscriber Login
     * Affiliate Disclosure

   (BUTTON) Cookie Settings

Follow us

     *
     *
     *
     *
     *

DISCLAIMER(S)

   Articles may contain affiliate links which enable us to share in the
   revenue of any purchases made.

   Registration on or use of this site constitutes acceptance of our Terms
   of Service.

   © 2022 Recurrent. All rights reserved.
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-1">
<text>
   #alternate What Is Nostalgia Good For? Quite a Bit, Research Shows

   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON) Sections
   (BUTTON) SEARCH
   Skip to contentSkip to site index
   Science


   Today’s Paper

   Science|What Is Nostalgia Good For? Quite a Bit, Research Shows
   https://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/09/science/what-is-nostalgia-good-for-q
   uite-a-bit-research-shows.html
     * (BUTTON) Give this articleGive this articleGive this article
     * (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)
     * +

   Advertisement
   Continue reading the main story

   Supported by
   Continue reading the main story

What Is Nostalgia Good For? Quite a Bit, Research Shows

     * Send any friend a story
       As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month.
       Anyone can read what you share.
       (BUTTON)
       (BUTTON) Give this articleGive this articleGive this article
     * (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)
     * +

   Video
   (BUTTON)

   transcript
   (BUTTON)
   Back
   (BUTTON)
   0:00/4:34
   -0:00

   transcript

Science of Nostalgia

It was first thought to be a “neurological disease of essentially demonic
cause,” but it turns out that nostalgia is good for your brain. And there’s
science to prove it.

          N/A

   Video player loading

   It was first thought to be a “neurological disease of essentially
   demonic cause,” but it turns out that nostalgia is good for your brain.
   And there’s science to prove it.

   By John Tierney
     * July 8, 2013

   See how this article appeared when it was originally published on
   NYTimes.com.

   SOUTHAMPTON, England — Not long after moving to the University of
   Southampton, Constantine Sedikides had lunch with a colleague in the
   psychology department and described some unusual symptoms he’d been
   feeling. A few times a week, he was suddenly hit with nostalgia for his
   previous home at the University of North Carolina: memories of old
   friends, Tar Heel basketball games, fried okra, the sweet smells of
   autumn in Chapel Hill.

   His colleague, a clinical psychologist, made an immediate diagnosis. He
   must be depressed. Why else live in the past? Nostalgia had been
   considered a disorder ever since the term was coined by a 17th-century
   Swiss physician who attributed soldiers’ mental and physical maladies
   to their longing to return home — nostos in Greek, and the accompanying
   pain, algos.

   But Dr. Sedikides didn’t want to return to any home — not to Chapel
   Hill, not to his native Greece — and he insisted to his lunch companion
   that he wasn’t in pain.

   “I told him I did live my life forward, but sometimes I couldn’t help
   thinking about the past, and it was rewarding,” he says. “Nostalgia
   made me feel that my life had roots and continuity. It made me feel
   good about myself and my relationships. It provided a texture to my
   life and gave me strength to move forward.”

   The colleague remained skeptical, but ultimately Dr. Sedikides
   prevailed. That lunch in 1999 inspired him to pioneer a field that
   today includes dozens of researchers around the world using tools
   developed at his social-psychology laboratory, including a
   questionnaire called the Southampton Nostalgia Scale. After a decade of
   study, nostalgia isn’t what it used to be — it’s looking a lot better.

   Nostalgia has been shown to counteract loneliness, boredom and anxiety.
   It makes people more generous to strangers and more tolerant of
   outsiders. Couples feel closer and look happier when they’re sharing
   nostalgic memories. On cold days, or in cold rooms, people use
   nostalgia to literally feel warmer.

   Nostalgia does have its painful side — it’s a bittersweet emotion — but
   the net effect is to make life seem more meaningful and death less
   frightening. When people speak wistfully of the past, they typically
   become more optimistic and inspired about the future.

   “Nostalgia makes us a bit more human,” Dr. Sedikides says. He considers
   the first great nostalgist to be Odysseus, an itinerant who used
   memories of his family and home to get through hard times, but Dr.
   Sedikides emphasizes that nostalgia is not the same as homesickness.
   It’s not just for those away from home, and it’s not a sickness,
   despite its historical reputation.

   Nostalgia was originally described as a “neurological disease of
   essentially demonic cause” by Johannes Hoffer, the Swiss doctor who
   coined the term in 1688. Military physicians speculated that its
   prevalence among Swiss mercenaries abroad was due to earlier damage to
   the soldiers’ ear drums and brain cells by the unremitting clanging of
   cowbells in the Alps.

   A Universal Feeling

   In the 19th and 20th centuries nostalgia was variously classified as an
   “immigrant psychosis,” a form of “melancholia” and a “mentally
   repressive compulsive disorder” among other pathologies. But when Dr.
   Sedikides, Tim Wildschut and other psychologists at Southampton began
   studying nostalgia, they found it to be common around the world,
   including in children as young as 7 (who look back fondly on birthdays
   and vacations).

   “The defining features of nostalgia in England are also the defining
   features in Africa and South America,” Dr. Wildschut says. The topics
   are universal — reminiscences about friends and family members,
   holidays, weddings, songs, sunsets, lakes. The stories tend to feature
   the self as the protagonist surrounded by close friends.

   Most people report experiencing nostalgia at least once a week, and
   nearly half experience it three or four times a week. These reported
   bouts are often touched off by negative events and feelings of
   loneliness, but people say the “nostalgizing” — researchers distinguish
   it from reminiscing — helps them feel better.

   To test these effects in the laboratory, researchers at Southampton
   induced negative moods by having people read about a deadly disaster
   and take a personality test that supposedly revealed them to be
   exceptionally lonely. Sure enough, the people depressed about the
   disaster victims or worried about being lonely became more likely to
   wax nostalgic. And the strategy worked: They subsequently felt less
   depressed and less lonely.

   Nostalgic stories aren’t simple exercises in cheeriness, though. The
   memories aren’t all happy, and even the joys are mixed with a wistful
   sense of loss. But on the whole, the positive elements greatly
   outnumber the negative elements, as the Southampton researchers found
   by methodically analyzing stories collected in the laboratory as well
   as in a magazine named Nostalgia.

   “Nostalgic stories often start badly, with some kind of problem, but
   then they tend to end well, thanks to help from someone close to you,”
   Dr. Sedikides says. “So you end up with a stronger feeling of belonging
   and affiliation, and you become more generous toward others.”

   A quick way to induce nostalgia is through music, which has become a
   favorite tool of researchers. In an experiment in the Netherlands, Ad
   J. J. M. Vingerhoets of Tilburg University and colleagues found that
   listening to songs made people feel not only nostalgic but also warmer
   physically.

   Image
   [09JPNOST-articleLarge.jpg?quality=75&amp;amp;auto=webp&amp;amp;disable=upscale
   ]
   Credit...Jasper James/Getty Images

   That warm glow was investigated in southern China by Xinyue Zhou of Sun
   Yat-Sen University. By tracking students over the course of a month,
   she and colleagues found that feelings of nostalgia were more common on
   cold days. The researchers also found that people in a cool room (68
   degrees Fahrenheit) were more likely to nostalgize than people in
   warmer rooms.

   Not everyone in the cool room turned nostalgic during the experiment,
   but the ones who did reported feeling warmer. That mind-body link, Dr.
   Wildschut says, means that nostalgia might have had evolutionary value
   to our ancestors long before Odysseus.

   “If you can recruit a memory to maintain physiological comfort, at
   least subjectively, that could be an amazing and complex adaptation,”
   he says. “It could contribute to survival by making you look for food
   and shelter that much longer.”

   Finding a Sweet Spot

   Of course, memories can also be depressing. Some researchers in the
   1970s and ’80s suggested that nostalgia could worsen a problem that
   psychologists call self-discontinuity, which is nicely defined in
   “Suite: Judy Blue Eyes,” by Stephen Stills: “Don’t let the past remind
   us of what we are not now.” This sense of loss and dislocation has
   repeatedly been linked to both physical and mental ills.

   But the feeling of discontinuity doesn’t seem to be a typical result of
   nostalgia, according to recent studies. In fact, people tend to have a
   healthier sense of self-continuity if they nostalgize more frequently,
   as measured on the scale developed at Southampton. To understand why
   these memories seem reassuring, Clay Routledge of North Dakota State
   University and other psychologists conducted a series of experiments
   with English, Dutch and American adults.

   First, the experimenters induced nostalgia by playing hit songs from
   the past for some people and letting them read lyrics to their favorite
   songs. Afterward, these people were more likely than a control group to
   say that they felt “loved” and that “life is worth living.”

   Then the researchers tested the effect in the other direction by trying
   to induce existential angst. They subjected some people to an essay by
   a supposed Oxford philosopher who wrote that life is meaningless
   because any single person’s contribution to the world is “paltry,
   pathetic and pointless.” Readers of the essay became more likely to
   nostalgize, presumably to ward off Sartrean despair.

   Moreover, when some people were induced to nostalgia before reading the
   bleak essay, they were less likely to be convinced by it. The brief
   stroll down memory lane apparently made life seem worthwhile, at least
   to the English students in that experiment. (Whether it would work with
   gloomy French intellectuals remains to be determined.)

   “Nostalgia serves a crucial existential function,” Dr. Routledge says.
   “It brings to mind cherished experiences that assure us we are valued
   people who have meaningful lives. Some of our research shows that
   people who regularly engage in nostalgia are better at coping with
   concerns about death.”

   Feeding the Memory Bank

   The usefulness of nostalgia seems to vary with age, according to Erica
   Hepper, a psychologist at the University of Surrey in England. She and
   her colleagues have found that nostalgia levels tend to be high among
   young adults, then dip in middle age and rise again during old age.

   “Nostalgia helps us deal with transitions,” Dr. Hepper says. “The young
   adults are just moving away from home and or starting their first jobs,
   so they fall back on memories of family Christmases, pets and friends
   in school.”

   Dr. Sedikides, now 54, still enjoys nostalgizing about Chapel Hill,
   although his range has expanded greatly over the past decade. He says
   that the years of research have inspired strategies for increasing
   nostalgia in his own life. One is to create more moments that will be
   memorable.

   “I don’t miss an opportunity to build nostalgic-to-be memories,” he
   says. “We call this anticipatory nostalgia and have even started a line
   of relevant research.”

   Another strategy is to draw on his “nostalgic repository” when he needs
   a psychological lift or some extra motivation. At such moments, he
   tries to focus on the memories and savor them without comparing them
   with anything else.

   “Many other people,” he explains, “have defined nostalgia as comparing
   the past with the present and saying, implicitly, that the past was
   better — ‘Those were the days.’ But that may not be the best way for
   most people to nostalgize. The comparison will not benefit, say, the
   elderly in a nursing home who don’t see their future as bright. But if
   they focus on the past in an existential way — ‘What has my life
   meant?’ — then they can potentially benefit.”

   This comparison-free nostalgizing is being taught to first-year college
   students as part of a study testing its value for people in difficult
   situations. Other experiments are using the same technique in people in
   nursing homes, women recovering from cancer surgery, and prison
   inmates.

   Is there anyone who shouldn’t be indulging in nostalgia? People who are
   leery of intimate relationships — “avoidant,” in psychological jargon —
   seem to reap relatively small benefits from nostalgia compared with
   people who crave closeness. And there are undoubtedly neurotics who
   overdo it. But for most others, Dr. Sedikides recommends regular
   exercises.

   “If you’re not neurotic or avoidant, I think you’ll benefit by
   nostalgizing two or maybe three times a week,” he says. “Experience it
   as a prized possession. When Humphrey Bogart says, ‘We’ll always have
   Paris,’ that’s nostalgia for you. We have it, and nobody can take it
   away from us. It’s our diamond.”

   Advertisement
   Continue reading the main story

Site Information Navigation

     * © 2022 The New York Times Company

     * NYTCo
     * Contact Us
     * Accessibility
     * Work with us
     * Advertise
     * T Brand Studio
     * Your Ad Choices
     * Privacy Policy
     * Terms of Service
     * Terms of Sale
     * Site Map
     * Canada
     * International
     * Help
     * Subscriptions

   IFRAME:
   https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-P528B3&amp;gtm_auth=tfAzqo1
   rYDLgYhmTnSjPqw&amp;gtm_preview=env-130&amp;gtm_cookies_win=x
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-21">
<text>
   Search
     __________________________________________________________________

     * Subscribe (BUTTON)

     * T&amp;C All Access

     T&amp;C Exclusives

     Society (BUTTON)
     * Money &amp; Power
     * Heritage
     * Politics

     The Scene (BUTTON)
     * Parties
     * Weddings

     Style (BUTTON)
     * Fashion
     * Jewelry &amp; Watches
     * Beauty
     * Men's Dept.
     * Home
     * Collectibles

     Leisure (BUTTON)
     * Travel
     * Arts &amp; Culture
     * Drinks
     * Food
     * Sporting
     * Real Estate

     Insider

     Follow (BUTTON)
     * Facebook
     * Twitter
     * Pinterest
     * Instagram

     Win

     Newsletter

   Do Not Sell My Personal Information

   Privacy NoticeTerms Of Use

   Skip to Content
     * Luxury Style
     * Travel
     * Leisure
     * Society

   Subscribe
   sign in
    1. Leisure

     Arts &amp; Culture

     Is Nostalgia the Enemy of the New?

        Hindsight is 2022: The Psychology Behind Our Cultural Nostalgia

   Look around and you’ll find it everywhere, from your TV to your dinner
   plate: a reverence for things past. But is it cute comfort or the enemy
   of the new? Here, our guide to navigating nostalgia, and how to look
   back while still forging ahead.


    By Kyle ChaykaPublished: Jan 23, 2022

   hindsight is 2022 a man and his dog viewing a beautiful waterfall in a
   valley
   MARCOS CHIN

   Among his many other principles, Friedrich Nietzsche had this idea of
   “eternal return.” It means that time is cyclical, and everything that
   has happened will happen again, like a tape loop. As Nietzsche
   theorized it in The Gay Science, “This life as you now live it and have
   lived it, you will have to live once more and innumerable times more;
   and there will be nothing new in it.” The philosophical question is
   whether this is a good or a bad thing. Such repetition could be either
   hellish or reaffirming, showing that life continues.

   Whether eternal return is real we can leave to religion. But we already
   experience it in American culture in the 21st century. As Nietzsche
   says, there is nothing new. Every television show, film, book, popular
   restaurant, and lifestyle fad seems to be a rehash of something that
   already happened. Culture is stuck on a loop: sequel after sequel,
   remake after remake, Spider-Man after Spider-Man. The plague of Marvel
   superhero movies was really just the harbinger of a grand, persistent
   nostalgia that seems to be our era’s preferred framework for consuming
   culture.

   Unable to imagine the future—as a result of the pandemic, climate
   change, social unrest, a sense of looming apocalypse—we return to the
   past. After all, the etymology of nostalgia comes down to a painful
   desire to return home.

   Sex and the City
   is back. Ryan Murphy is dipping into the well of midcentury mishegoss
   for a new Netflix series. Luca Guadagnino is remaking Brideshead
   Revisited for the BBC. Beyond the literal remakes, streaming services
   fight over access to nostalgic classics: Seinfeld, Friends, The Office.
   The rewatching of prestige TV series became something of a competition
   during the pandemic. At first it was Mad Men (itself a piece of
   nostalgia for midcentury New York), and then The Sopranos became the
   primary target, elucidated with essays and reconsiderations and,
   finally, a disappointing prequel film.

     Here’s the thing about indulging in classics: They provide
     experiences we know are highly unlikely to let us down.

   Like storylines, there are certain physical spaces we can’t resist
   returning to in hectic moments. These interiors are, without fail,
   familiar and cozy rather than austere or challenging. Take the French
   brasserie. It’s a classic with a constant whiff of the past, as if it
   exists on a separate timeline. One can barely penetrate the crowds at
   New York’s Balthazar right now—the flagship of Keith McNally’s
   design-as-comfort-food restaurants. The offspring it inspired
   (Frenchette, Le CouCou, Le Crocodile) are similarly choked with diners.
   Rickety stools are out; velvet banquettes are in.

   So are private clubs. London’s Casa Cruz is opening a six-story outpost
   on the Upper East Side, with a private floor for its investors only.
   The Britely, in Los Angeles, is a social club reviving old-school
   Hollywood glamour (chandeliers in the form of pink feather cascades)
   along with a menu from ’90s celebrity chef Wolfgang Puck. Meanwhile,
   travel influencers prefer glamorous perennials like Paris and Lake Como
   to rugged, far-flung destinations.

   Here’s the thing about indulging in classics: They provide experiences
   we know are highly unlikely to let us down. At the moment we can hardly
   be blamed for such tendencies. The past two years have been frightening
   enough that guilty pleasures are more than justified. But nostalgia
   consumption comes with a cost. Too much has a way of impeding new
   culture, and there’s not much incentive to stop wallowing in it.
   Incidentally, even our most newfangled creations promote our obsessions
   with the past: Algorithmic social media feeds measure what we already
   engage with in order to recommend new content. Watch Bridgerton on
   Netflix, and suddenly every other Regency and Victorian-era series is
   at the top of your homescreen. TikTok’s “For You” feed provides only
   content that is familiar or universally inoffensive. The personalized
   echo chamber of political content is often lamented; our cultural echo
   chambers can be equally smothering.

   More worrying still is that this phenomenon has a deadening effect on
   creativity in general, because it’s harder to reach audiences with
   original ideas when technology is systematically weeding out anything
   unusual. With our digital cultural channels, art can be profitable only
   if it gets attention, and it can get attention only if it matches a
   preexisting pattern. That pattern is called nostalgia, and while it’s
   pleasurable, is it not ultimately boring? Per Nietzsche, we can be
   happy with the idea that life as a whole repeats, but no one wants to
   be doomed to the same TV show for eternity.

   This story appears in the February 2022 issue of Town &amp; Country.
   SUBSCRIBE NOW

Watch Next



   (BUTTON) preview for Leisure Section Curated

In the Magazine

   where to travel in 2023

   The Best Places to Travel in 2023
   couture

   Well, Isn’t That Special?
   christian dior runway paris fashion week haute couture fall winter 2022
   2023

   Why Dior's Couture is Canon
   darcy miller

   5 Commandments for a #VeryTandC Holiday Fête
   Advertisement - Continue Reading Below
   where they know you

   How to Couture Your Life
   the trois chevaux staff

   When You Can't Doordash It
   greta garbo in back of limousine

   A Case for the Return of Mystery
   alex murdaugh

   Murder and the Myth of the Good Family
   art deco jewelry might make its return

   Art Deco Jewelry Might Make its Return
   tc pretoc december 2022

   Is It Time to Bring Back the Holiday Punch Bowl?
   hermes store

   Tour the Most Beautiful Hermes Store in the World
   new york october 5 the movie breakfast at tiffanys, directed by blake
   edwards and based on the novel by truman capote seen here, audrey
   hepburn as holly golightly and cat initial theatrical release october
   5, 1961 screen capture paramount pictures photo by cbs via getty images

   Is Nightlife Back Too Much?
   Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

   NewsletterContact UsSubscribeOther Hearst SubscriptionsAdvertise
   OnlineAbout UsPress RoomCustomer Service Hearst Fashion and Luxury
   Collection - A Part of Hearst Digital Media

   A Part of Hearst Digital Media

   Every item on this page was chosen by a Town &amp; Country editor. We may
   earn commission on some of the items you choose to buy.

   ©Hearst Magazine Media, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
   Privacy Notice/Notice at CollectionYour California Privacy
   RightsInterest-Based AdsTerms of UseSite Map
   Do Not Sell My Personal Information
   Cookies Choices
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-22">
<text>
   #Homesick for Yesterday » Feed Homesick for Yesterday » Comments Feed
   Homesick for Yesterday » CfP: Pop Nostalgia: The Uses of the Past in
   Popular Culture Comments Feed alternate alternate alternate RDF Version
   RDF Version of this post RDF Version of the category Posts Outline

Homesick for Yesterday

A History of the Nostalgia Wave

   (BUTTON) Menu Skip to content
     * Home
     * Project description
     * Events
          + Pop Nostalgia Conference
          + Nostalgia conference
          + Things We Keep
     * Project publications
     * About
     * Credits

   Search for: ____________________ Search

CfP: Pop Nostalgia: The Uses of the Past in Popular Culture

   18/04/2016PostsTobias Becker

   Pop nostalgia, we are told, is everywhere. Our current golden age of
   television—from Mad Men to Vinyl, Downton Abbey to Call the
   Midwife—lovingly recreates earlier periods of the twentieth century,
   while club nights devoted to the 1980s or 1990s allow us to return to
   our youth. What is more, popular culture is, in the words of music
   journalist Simon Reynolds, addicted to its own past. It not only
   reminisces, it revives, reissues, remixes earlier forms and styles
   instead of coming up with genuinely new. Finally, our most modern
   technologies are always also time machines: producing sepia-coloured
   images of the present for an anticipated nostalgic recollection in the
   future.

   15391.books.origjpg These very different cultural phenomena, which are
   often subsumed under the term nostalgia, raise a number of still
   under-explored questions. How new is this development, given that
   period films are as old as the cinema and that popular culture and
   music has drawn on earlier periods as long as it exists? Can, contrary
   to Reynolds’ argument, the recycling of old styles and forms not also
   be highly creative and result in innovations? Are period settings and
   costumes, retro and vintage styles as such indicative and synonymous
   with nostalgia? Is it really nostalgia—a sentimental longing for
   yesterday—that drives our interest in and our engagement with the past?
   And if not what other motivations are at play? What role, for example,
   have media technologies such as film and the internet played in
   preserving the culture of the past in the present?

   These are some of the questions the workshop Pop Nostalgia addresses.
   It explores the uses of the past in popular culture across all media
   and genre, from literature, cinema, television, and video games to
   theme park, club nights and sports events. It is interested not only in
   representations of the past but also in their production and
   circulation as well as in audiences and reception. The workshop is
   particularly interested in the historical dimension of pop nostalgia,
   namely how it has changed over the course of the nineteenth and
   twentieth century.

   We welcome proposals for twenty-minute presentations from all
   disciplines and particularly encourage comparative and
   interdisciplinary perspectives. Please submit an abstract of no more
   than 300 words, along with a short CV, by 30 June 2016 to both Dion
   Georgiou (BSSH South Sport and Leisure History Network) at
   diongeorgiou@hotmail.co.uk and Tobias Becker (German Historical
   Institute London) at becker@ghil.ac.uk. The conference will take place
   from 10 to 11 November at the German Historical Institute London.
   Accommodation during the conference will be covered. Up to 100£ of
   travel costs will be reimbursed to those traveling within Europe; 800£
   for those traveling from elsewhere.
     __________________________________________________________________

     *
     *
     *

Post navigation

   ← Conference report “Nostalgia: Historicizing the Longing for the Past”
   Talk on “pop nostalgia” at IHR, 16 May →

   Search for: ____________________ Search

   Until the 1950s the term nostalgia primarily designated a pathological
   form of homesickness. Only from the mid-60s onwards did the new
   definition, a “yearning for the past”, find its ways into the
   dictionaries. At the same time intellectuals in the United States,
   Britain and West Germany observed a “nostalgia wave”. This diagnosis
   serves as point of departure for a research project at the German
   Historical Institute London on the popularisation of history in the
   1970s and 80s. This blog introduces the project, shares ideas and
   information and charts its progress.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Noch bis in die 1950er Jahre hinein bezeichnete der Begriff Nostalgia
   in erster Linie eine krankhafte Form des Heimwehs. Erst Mitte der
   sechziger Jahre fand die “Sehnsucht nach Vergangenheit” Eingang in die
   Wörterbücher. Zeitgleich meinten Intellektuelle in den USA,
   Großbritannien und Westdeutschland eine “Nostalgie-Welle” zu
   beobachten. Diese Diagnose bildet den Ausgangspunktes eines am
   Deutschen Historischen Institut London angesiedelten Projekts über die
   Popularisierung von Geschichte in den 1970er und 1980er Jahren. Dieser
   Blog stellt das Projekt vor und hält über seine Fortschritte auf dem
   Laufenden.

Categories

     * Posts (46)

Archives

     * February 2022 (2)
     * January 2022 (3)
     * November 2021 (2)
     * May 2020 (2)
     * April 2020 (1)
     * May 2019 (1)
     * February 2019 (1)
     * December 2018 (1)
     * November 2018 (4)
     * October 2018 (1)
     * September 2018 (1)
     * July 2018 (1)
     * June 2018 (3)
     * March 2018 (2)
     * December 2017 (2)
     * September 2017 (2)
     * June 2017 (2)
     * December 2016 (1)
     * August 2016 (1)
     * June 2016 (2)
     * May 2016 (1)
     * April 2016 (2)
     * March 2016 (1)
     * February 2016 (1)
     * January 2016 (1)
     * November 2015 (1)
     * October 2015 (1)
     * July 2015 (2)
     * June 2015 (1)

Bookmarks

     * German Historical Institute London
     * Max Weber Foundation
     * Things We Keep

RSS Calenda

     * Limits of Europeanness? Contested Notions of Difference and
       Belonging (16th-21st Centuries)
     * Violent Turns: Sources, Interpretations, Responses
     * Women’s Role in the History of Nineteenth-Century Art Revisited
     * Artists, Agents and Patrons from the Low Countries in the Iberian
       World
     * Magnats, entremetteurs et contrebandiers : les distributeurs de
       films et leurs réseaux au XXe siècle
     * Materials of Empire
     * Mapping otherness in the North
     * A networked urban world: small, medium, and large cities (from the
       Middle Ages to Contemporary Times)
     * Authenticity in European Cities
     * Hamsa: Journal of Judaic and Islamic Studies - Varia

Meta

     * Log in
     * Entries RSS
     * Comments RSS
     * Hypotheses

   A blog proposed by Hypotheses - This blog in Hypotheses catalogue -
   Privacy Policy
   Syndication Feed - Credits
   Proudly powered by WordPress

   (BUTTON)

   Search OpenEdition Search

   You will be redirected to OpenEdition Search
   ____________________
   ( ) In All OpenEdition
   (*) On Homesick for Yesterday
   (BUTTON) Search

   ">gt;
   (BUTTON)

     * TODO

   OpenEdition Search
   (BUTTON) All OpenEdition

   A digital resources portal for the humanities and social sciences
   OpenEdition
   Our platforms
   OpenEdition Books OpenEdition Journals Hypotheses Calenda
   Libraries and institutions
   OpenEdition Freemium
   Our services
   OpenEdition Search Newsletter
   Follow us
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-24">
<text>
   (BUTTON) Skip to main content

   IFRAME:
   https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-TFKV632&amp;gtm_auth=NsJH3T
   s1-89I8lZURwQYmw&amp;gtm_preview=env-1&amp;gtm_cookies_win=x

   IFRAME:
   https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-N279F7B&amp;gtm_auth=jfKETt
   lWamfZ4l02YiFCQw&amp;gtm_preview=env-1&amp;gtm_cookies_win=x

     * (BUTTON) Download Article
       Download Article
          + Download PDF
          + ReadCube
          + EPUB
          + XML (NLM)
       (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)
       Share on
          +
          +
          +
       (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)
       Export citation
          + EndNote
          + Reference Manager
          + Simple TEXT file
          + BibTex
       (BUTTON)

     * total views
     *

   View Article Impact

SHARE ON

     *
     *
     *
     *
     *

Edited by

Jeffrey D. Green

   Virginia Commonwealth University, United States

Reviewed by

Sandra Garrido

   The MARCS Institute for Brain, Behaviour and Development, Western
   Sydney University, Australia

Tim Wildschut

   University of Southampton, United Kingdom

TABLE OF CONTENTS

     *
          + Abstract
          + Introduction
          + Methods
          + Results
          + Discussion
          + Data Availability Statement
          + Ethics Statement
          + Author Contributions
          + Conflict of Interest
          + References
          + Appendix

     * (BUTTON) Export citation
          + EndNote
          + Reference Manager
          + Simple TEXT file
          + BibTex

   Check for updates

People also looked at

BRIEF RESEARCH REPORT article

   Front. Psychol., 29 May 2020
   Sec. Personality and Social Psychology
   https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01186

When Nostalgia Tilts to Sad: Anticipatory and Personal Nostalgia

   Krystine I. Batcho^*
     * Le Moyne College, Syracuse, NY, United States

   Contemporary research has showcased many benefits of nostalgia, but its
   bittersweet character and historical reputation as unhealthy raise the
   possibility of less favorable impacts. In recent studies, daily diary
   data highlighted nostalgia’s mixed valence and suggested that nostalgia
   is more strongly associated with negative feelings. Variables that
   influence the adaptive or maladaptive dimensions of nostalgia have not
   yet been fully explored. Recently, a focus on when nostalgia is
   experienced relative to past and future was introduced in the construct
   of anticipatory nostalgia, missing the present prematurely before it
   has become past. Distinct from personal nostalgia, anticipatory
   nostalgia was found to be characterized by difficulty enjoying the
   present and a tendency toward sadness and worry. The present study
   examines the distinctive dynamics at play in anticipatory and personal
   nostalgia by exploring the relationship between each type of
   dispositional nostalgia and reported experience with happy and sad
   stories. The Nostalgia Inventory, the Survey of Anticipatory Nostalgia,
   and a brief form of the PANAS were completed by 144 undergraduates (110
   women), who rated their exposure and reactions to happy and sad
   stories. Reported frequency of exposure to happy and sad stories was
   related to dispositional happiness and sadness. Personal and
   anticipatory nostalgia did not differ in frequency of exposure to happy
   and sad stories, but they did differ in reactivity to and learning from
   sad stories. Findings highlight the importance of the timing of
   nostalgia, consistent with the distinction between nostalgia for the
   past and nostalgia for what is still present.

Introduction

   In contrast to nostalgia’s dark origins in medical history as a disease
   construct, contemporary researchers have largely rediscovered nostalgia
   as a healthy psychological phenomenon. Empirical evidence has
   contradicted historical arguments that nostalgia reflects an inability
   to accept the loss of the past or serves as an obstacle to living in
   the present or moving forward (Werman, 1977; Kaplan, 1984, 1987).
   Presumed maladaptive qualities have been replaced by documented
   beneficial functions, including strengthened social connectedness,
   continuity of self, enhanced self-esteem, adaptive coping strategies,
   meaning in life, and comfort in the face of threatened mortality
   (Batcho, 1998, 2013; Wildschut et al., 2006, 2010; Batcho et al., 2008;
   Routledge et al., 2008; Zhou et al., 2008; Iyer and Jetten, 2011;
   Cheung et al., 2013; Stephan et al., 2014; Sedikides et al., 2015).

   However, recent research has revived questions about possible
   unfavorable aspects of nostalgia by highlighting its distinctive
   bittersweet nature (Larsen et al., 2001; Larsen and McGraw, 2011, 2014;
   Hepper et al., 2012). While most studies have found that nostalgia
   increases positive affect, instances of elevated negative affect,
   including sadness, have been identified (Zinchenko, 2011; Stephan et
   al., 2012; Newman et al., 2019). The extent to which nostalgia is
   uplifting and helpful or bitter and counterproductive might depend upon
   personality traits or contextual variables (Barrett et al., 2010;
   Köneke, 2010; Wildschut et al., 2010, 2019; Hart et al., 2011; Iyer and
   Jetten, 2011; Seehusen et al., 2013; Abeyta et al., 2014; Garrido,
   2018). One largely unexplored variable is the timing of nostalgia
   (Batcho, 2020). As an experience that unfolds over time, nostalgia’s
   impact might depend upon the cognitive appraisal that directs the
   feelings and thoughts generated during a nostalgic episode.

   When nostalgia focuses on loss that has not yet occurred, the sadness
   of anticipated loss is premature and the experience becomes a
   paradoxical phenomenon of enjoying the present while missing it as if
   already relegated to the past. Dubbed anticipatory nostalgia, such
   premature nostalgia has been introduced as a construct in its own right
   (Batcho and Shikh, 2016; Bergs et al., 2019). A form of nostalgia by
   definition, it can be distinguished from personal nostalgia. Personal
   nostalgia is missing what has been lost, whereas anticipatory nostalgia
   involves missing what has not yet been lost. Anticipatory nostalgia
   depends upon mentally creating an imagined future that gives rise to
   missing what will be “someday past,” yet still present. By engaging
   abstract construal, anticipatory nostalgia might engender psychological
   distance from the present, decreasing direct involvement in the current
   concrete reality (Nussbaum et al., 2003).

   Anticipatory nostalgia should not be confused with anticipated
   nostalgia. Anticipated nostalgia is the prediction or expectation that
   one will feel nostalgic for an aspect of the present in the future, not
   feeling nostalgic in the present. Predicting future nostalgia is an
   interesting cognitive process but not identical to the emotional
   phenomenon of feeling nostalgic before the future loss occurs. A person
   can expect to miss a loved one when they leave or die someday, but the
   expectation doesn’t necessarily include the emotional component of
   nostalgic missing. Expecting future nostalgia has been shown to predict
   nostalgia after an important life transition. The finding of a greater
   likelihood of expecting future nostalgia for more positive experiences
   is not surprising, as people would be likely to expect to miss
   enjoyable or valued events. Expecting future nostalgia was associated
   with greater savoring of the experience, and post-transition nostalgia
   was associated with benefits, including enhanced self-esteem, social
   connectedness, and meaning in life (Cheung et al., 2019).

   By contrast, it is not clear whether anticipatory nostalgia, premature
   missing of what is still present, shares the benefits of nostalgia for
   the past. Despite eliciting the sadness of loss, anticipatory nostalgia
   might also allow reappraisal of the present. In spite of or because of
   the sadness, anticipating loss during adversity might encourage
   effective coping by strengthening appreciation of what is good in the
   present and providing the comfort of knowing that difficulties will not
   last. Initial empirical investigations to identify the benefits or
   disadvantages of anticipatory nostalgia assessed anticipatory nostalgia
   as a dispositional trait, that is, as the tendency of individuals to
   experience it generally. The early studies supported the viability of
   anticipatory nostalgia as a construct distinguishable from personal
   nostalgia (Batcho and Shikh, 2016). Unlike dispositional personal
   nostalgia, dispositional anticipatory nostalgia was characterized by a
   greater tendency for people and experiences to cause worry and sadness
   and was more likely to occur in adverse circumstances.

   The present study extends the early research by exploring the
   relationship between nostalgia and experience with stories. A
   substantial amount of the existing research on nostalgia has examined
   memories. Like memories, stories entail the past inherently by
   recounting what has happened in the past. Stories differ from memories
   in that the content of stories does not necessarily originate from an
   individual’s own experience. Empirical research exploring stories is
   voluminous and well-established, but has focused primarily on
   identifying features of stories, context, and cognitive processing that
   influence retention and emotional and behavioral impacts (Habermas and
   Diel, 2010; Dunlop et al., 2011; McGinty et al., 2013; Berger et al.,
   2019; Landrum et al., 2019). Not yet adequately explored is the
   enduring or cumulative influence of emotional stories, especially those
   that convey personal meaning. Qualitative analyses have shown that
   personally relevant stories can exert a powerful lasting influence
   (Pratt and Fiese, 2004; Kiser et al., 2010). In their memoirs, members
   of the resistance during World War II explained how stories encountered
   during childhood generated nostalgia and played pivotal roles in their
   dedication to the resistance, even to the point of enduring hardships
   and risking death (Batcho, 2018).

   The present work introduced a focus on accumulated exposure to stories
   over time. In an investigation of the relationship between overall
   exposure to stories and personal and anticipatory nostalgia,
   participants estimated and shared their experience with happy and sad
   stories. If experiencing nostalgia prematurely is less adaptive than
   missing what is already past, anticipatory nostalgia will be aligned
   with unfavorable reactions to stories, whereas personal nostalgia will
   be associated with positive reactions. In particular, exposure to happy
   and sad stories was examined to explore whether dispositional
   anticipatory nostalgia is associated with greater exposure, reactivity,
   or attraction to sad stories. If the association of anticipatory
   nostalgia with sadness reflects an overall sad disposition,
   anticipatory nostalgia would be expected to correlate with greater
   exposure to or recall of sad stories. If anticipatory nostalgia
   develops in response to sad experiences, reported exposure to sad
   stories would be expected to correlate with anticipatory nostalgia.
   However, prior research has not examined the possibility of cognitive
   benefits. If anticipating future loss entails helpful cognitive
   processing, anticipatory nostalgia will be associated with greater
   likelihood of learning from sad stories.

Methods

Participants

   A sample of 144 undergraduates, 110 women and 34 men, ranging in age
   from 18 to 39 years (Mdn = 20, SD = 2.65), completed the study. In
   accordance with ethical norms of the American Psychological
   Association, participants were offered either a small stipend or
   optional extra credit for a course for their participation. The offer
   of a stipend helped recruit students majoring in different disciplines.

Material and Procedure

   All procedures and material for the study were reviewed and approved by
   the college Institutional Review Board for compliance with ethical
   guidelines. In small groups in a laboratory room, participants
   completed paper forms of the Nostalgia Inventory, the Survey of
   Anticipatory Nostalgia, selected items from Watson and Clark’s (1994)
   Positive and Negative Affect Schedule-Expanded Form (PANAS-X), and a
   survey of experience with happy and sad stories constructed for this
   study.

   The Nostalgia Inventory assessed personal nostalgia as a dispositional
   trait (Batcho, 1995, 1998, 2007). Consistent with Stern’s (1992)
   definition of nostalgia as the longing for one’s past, respondents rate
   the extent to which they miss each of 20 items from when they were
   younger on a 9-point scale (1 = Not at all, 9 = Very much). The
   inventory is reported to have a split-half reliability of 0.78 and
   1-week test-retest reliability of 0.84 (Batcho, 1995), an acceptable
   level of internal consistency of 0.86 as measured by Cronbach’s alpha
   (Batcho et al., 2008), and test-retest reliability of 0.82 over a
   4-week interval (Batcho et al., 2011). Consistent with prior research,
   the Nostalgia Inventory yielded an acceptable level of internal
   consistency of 0.88 as measured by Cronbach’s alpha and a split-half
   reliability of 0.81 in this study.

   The Survey of Anticipatory Nostalgia focuses on future loss rather than
   the past (e.g., “society will change”). Given a 9-point scale (1 =
   rarely/not very, 9 = very often/very much), respondents were
   instructed: “Sometimes we realize that something won’t last forever. It
   can be an activity, a thing, or time with a person or group. Using the
   scale below, CIRCLE a number to estimate how often or to what extent
   you feel like you already miss each of the items before the change has
   happened.” The survey is reported to have a split-half reliability of
   0.83, 4-week test-retest reliability of 0.71, and internal consistency
   as measured by Cronbach’s alpha of 0.87 (Batcho and Shikh, 2016).
   Consistent with prior research, internal consistency as measured by
   Cronbach’s alpha was 0.88, and split-half reliability measured 0.79 in
   this study.

   As in prior research (Batcho and Shikh, 2016), mean ratings on the
   Nostalgia Inventory correlated moderately with mean ratings on the
   Survey of Anticipatory Nostalgia, r[(][142][)] = 0.52, p <lt; 0.001.

   The Survey of Experience with Stories (Appendix) included eight items
   asking participants to rate their experience with stories on a 9-point
   scale (1 = rarely/not at all, 9 = very often/very much). Participants
   rated how often they had been exposed to happy and to sad stories in
   general, how happy and how sad happy and sad stories made them feel,
   how often they choose happy and sad stories, and how often they benefit
   or learn from happy and sad stories. Participants were asked to
   describe the earliest happy and sad story they remember, as well as
   additional happy and sad stories. They were instructed: “You might have
   read it or it might have been told to you, read to you, depicted in a
   video or film, or have been a news story. You might have thought it was
   a true story or a fictional one.”

   Consistent with prior research (Batcho and Shikh, 2016), six items were
   selected (cheerful, happy, joyful, sad, blue, and downhearted) from the
   PANAS-X (Watson and Clark, 1994). Given the dispositional or trait
   instruction, participants rated the extent to which they had felt each
   item “in general, that is, on the average” on a 5-point scale (1 = very
   slightly or not at all, 5 = extremely).

Results

Gender

   Men and women did not differ in average personal nostalgia scores, t(1,
   142) = −1.768, p = 0.084, η[p]^2 = 0.029, but women (M = 6.00, SD =
   1.18) scored higher in anticipatory nostalgia than did men (M = 5.24,
   SD = 1.20), t(1, 142) = −3.29, p = 0.001, η[p]^2 = 0.071.

Nostalgia and Positive and Negative Affect

   Ratings of PANAS-X items of generalized affect yielded additional
   evidence for anticipatory nostalgia as a distinct construct. Ratings
   from the three items cheerful, happy, and joyful were averaged to yield
   a composite measure of a tendency toward happiness. Ratings from the
   three items sad, blue, and downhearted were averaged to serve as a
   measure of sadness. Personal nostalgia was not correlated with
   happiness, r[(][142][)] = 0.06, p = 0.476, or sadness, r[(][142][)] =
   0.12, p = 0.136, whereas anticipatory nostalgia correlated
   significantly with sadness, r[(][142][)] = 0.21, p = 0.012, but not
   with happiness, r[(][142][)] = 0.14, p = 0.087.

Stories

Nostalgia and Experience With Happy and Sad Stories

   The relationship of personal and anticipatory nostalgia to exposure and
   reactions to happy and sad stories was explored in correlational
   analyses, with gender and dispositional sadness and happiness
   controlled (Table 1). Frequency of exposure to happy and sad stories
   was assessed in two ways. Participants were asked to rate overall
   exposure by rating how often they encountered happy and sad stories.
   They also recalled happy and sad stories in open-ended essays, and the
   number of stories reported served as an additional measure of exposure.
   Participants were free to recall as many stories as they could without
   a time limit. Subjective estimates and recall entail different
   cognitive processes. Consistent with such differences, the ratings and
   number of stories recalled were not correlated for happy stories,
   r[(][142][)] = 0.01, p = 0.922, or sad stories, r[(][142][)] = 0.11, p
   = 0.197, and served as independent measures. Neither type of nostalgia
   correlated significantly with either indicator of frequency of exposure
   to happy and sad stories, suggesting that people prone to personal or
   anticipatory nostalgia have not experienced happy and sad stories more
   or less often. Attraction to or preference for sad or happy stories was
   assessed by asking participants to rate how often they choose happy and
   sad stories. Neither type of nostalgia correlated significantly with
   story choice, suggesting that proneness to personal or anticipatory
   nostalgia does not reflect an underlying bias or preference for happy
   or sad material.
   TABLE 1
   www.frontiersin.org

   Table 1. Partial correlations of personal and anticipatory nostalgia
   with exposure and reactions to stories with gender and dispositional
   happiness and sadness controlled.

   However, ratings suggested that they react differently to happy and sad
   stories emotionally and cognitively. Emotionally, personal and
   anticipatory nostalgia both correlated with sadness induced by sad
   stories, but only personal nostalgia correlated significantly with
   happiness elicited by happy stories. Results suggested that personal
   and anticipatory nostalgia differed in cognitive engagement with
   stories. Personal nostalgia correlated with learning from happy
   stories, whereas anticipatory nostalgia correlated with learning from
   sad stories. Consistent with prior findings of an association between
   anticipatory nostalgia and a tendency to be made sad by people and
   events, these results suggested that people prone to anticipatory
   nostalgia may be less reactive to happy stories. Present findings
   suggested that people prone to anticipatory nostalgia process sad
   stories in more productive ways, whereas people prone to personal
   nostalgia are more reactive to happy stories and process happy stories
   in beneficial ways.

Contributions of Nostalgia and Stories to Mood

   The contributions of nostalgia and stories to dispositional mood were
   explored further in linear regression analyses (Table 2). The composite
   happiness ratings were examined in a linear regression analysis, with
   gender and mean ratings from the Nostalgia Inventory and the Survey of
   Anticipatory Nostalgia independent variables. The role of stories was
   explored with the inclusion of mean ratings of frequency of exposure to
   happy and sad stories, degree of happiness (sadness) induced by happy
   (sad) stories, and learning from happy and sad stories.
   TABLE 2
   www.frontiersin.org

   Table 2. Summary of regression analyses on dispositional mood.

   In a significant model, F(9, 133) = 5.53, p <lt; 0.001, Adjusted R^2 =
   0.223, gender, personal nostalgia, and anticipatory nostalgia were not
   significant. Dispositional happiness was predicted by the frequency of
   exposure to happy, but not sad stories. Similarly, happiness was
   predicted by the degree to which happy stories induce happiness, but
   not by the degree to which sad stories induce sadness, consistent with
   an affect-specific effect. The absence of significant effects of
   learning from happy or sad stories was consistent with a distinction
   between affective and cognitive impacts.

   A parallel analysis was conducted with the composite sadness ratings as
   the dependent variable. In a significant model, F(9, 133) = 1.92, p =
   0.05, Adjusted R^2 = 0.055, gender, personal nostalgia, and
   anticipatory nostalgia were not significant. Dispositional sadness was
   predicted by the frequency of exposure to sad, but not happy stories.
   However, sadness was not predicted by the sadness elicited by sad
   stories, happiness induced by happy stories, or learning from sad or
   happy stories.

Limitations

   This study introduced a focus on stories as a vehicle for comparing
   emotional and cognitive reactions to cumulative meaningful experiences
   associated with personal and anticipatory nostalgia. Not allowing
   causal relationships to be determined, this exploratory study
   encourages future research based on experimental designs to identify
   variables responsible for the differences between personal and
   anticipatory nostalgia. Further research is needed also to explore
   participant variables in samples characterized by broader demographic
   and diversity constituents.

   A fuller understanding of adaptive functions of nostalgia would be
   advanced with studies that identify the nature and content of the
   stories participants prone to personal or anticipatory nostalgia were
   exposed to and remember. Similarly, future work is needed to determine
   how those prone to nostalgia learn or benefit from happy or sad
   stories. Qualitative analyses of the impactful stories can yield
   insights into the nature of the lessons acquired.

Discussion

   The present findings reinforced the importance of when nostalgia is
   felt relative to past and future. Results are consistent with the view
   of anticipatory nostalgia as distinguishable from personal nostalgia
   and worthy of further research as a distinct phenomenon. Stories were
   shown to be effective material for elucidating the roles of emotional
   and cognitive processes in personal and anticipatory nostalgia.
   Exploring reactions to stories can clarify the adaptive and maladaptive
   functions of nostalgia within a meaningful practical context. Access to
   24 h news cycles and online venues have expanded the influence of the
   content and format of stories. The current findings highlight the
   importance of future research to understand the impact of immersion in
   a story-rich environment.

   The present study suggests the possibility of a cumulative contribution
   of experience with stories to emotional well-being. Greater exposure to
   happy stories correlated with higher levels of dispositional happiness,
   and greater exposure to sad stories correlated with higher levels of
   dispositional sadness. The overall pattern of relationships is
   interesting. While dispositional happiness was related to the degree to
   which stories elicited happiness, sadness was related to experience
   with sad stories regardless of the degree of sadness the stories
   elicited. The present findings suggest that the emotional impact of a
   story depends in part upon the emotional and cognitive reactivity of
   the listener or viewer.

   Pertinent to the current study, personal and anticipatory nostalgia
   were distinguished by different ways of interacting with stories. There
   was no evidence that differential exposure to happy and sad stories
   accounted for the distinction. Personal and anticipatory nostalgia both
   correlated with being made sad by sad stories, suggesting that
   participants prone to anticipatory nostalgia are not more sensitive to
   sad stories. However, only personal nostalgia was associated with being
   made happy by happy stories, suggesting that anticipatory nostalgia may
   be associated with less reactivity to happy stories. Furthermore,
   personal nostalgia was related to greater likelihood of learning from
   happy stories, whereas anticipatory nostalgia was associated with
   greater likelihood of learning from sad stories.

   Prior research differentiated personal and anticipatory nostalgia by
   their relationships to happiness and sadness. Personal and anticipatory
   nostalgia both include missing, longing or yearning. In personal
   nostalgia, we enjoy valued aspects of our past again, thereby enjoying
   them twice. In anticipatory nostalgia, we have only the present to
   enjoy them. In fact, we feel the sadness of missing them twice, once in
   the actual present and once in the imagined future. Envisioning what
   the future might bring can be accompanied by sadness missing the
   present and worry about what will come next. In prior research,
   participants prone to anticipatory nostalgia had reported a greater
   tendency for people and experiences to cause them worry and sadness,
   but anticipatory nostalgia did not predict generalized sadness.
   Consistent with prior research, anticipatory nostalgia did not
   contribute to generalized sadness in this study, suggesting that people
   prone to anticipatory nostalgia are not generally unhappy.

   Given that personal and anticipatory nostalgia are both emotional
   constructs, theorists are justified in comparing their emotional
   facets. The present findings highlight the wisdom of considering also
   the cognitive dynamics in the relationship of nostalgia to the impact
   of stories. Rather than generally unhappy, people prone to anticipatory
   nostalgia may be more likely to benefit from sad stories by learning
   ways of coping with current or future problems and anxiety. Their
   inclination to imagine the future as present may reflect conceptual
   thinking that enables them to apply lessons from stories to their own
   lives. It remains for future investigations to identify the variables
   or conditions underlying the emotional and cognitive dynamics that
   distinguish personal from anticipatory nostalgia.

   The present findings encourage further research to determine the
   long-term effects of being immersed in happy or sad stories. The
   relationship of learning from sad stories with anticipatory nostalgia
   suggests that benefiting from stories may be facilitated by an ability
   to imagine how the survival or resolution of sadness in a story might
   apply to an individual’s own life. Just as the sadness of future loss
   can be experienced before it is actualized, in adverse times, imagining
   when difficulties will have been overcome can be a source of
   consolation. But looking ahead brings the sad realization that the good
   of the present might be gone too. Future research is needed to
   determine if anticipatory nostalgia can be constructive in certain
   circumstances or applied therapeutically to remind people that time and
   the opportunity to be engaged in the present is fleeting. Sad stories
   may provide opportunities to deal with adversity safely from a
   distance, as anticipatory nostalgia allows loss to be confronted from a
   temporal distance.

   In a digital age, children are growing up with expanding opportunities
   for exposure to stories with negative content presented in graphic
   media without the comforting presence of adults who can contribute
   meaningful perspective. The cumulative impact over time is not yet
   known, but the present findings suggest greater dispositional sadness
   with increasing exposure to sad stories. Current findings highlight the
   importance of identifying ways of cultivating traits or
   cognitive-emotional resources to buffer adverse outcomes. While sadness
   might be considered a maladaptive affective dimension of anticipatory
   nostalgia, the benefits of learning from sad material may suggest there
   are untapped adaptive cognitive functions of anticipatory nostalgia.

Data Availability Statement

   The datasets for this article are not publicly available because
   participants were not so instructed. Requests to access the datasets
   should be directed to KB, batcho@lemoyne.edu.

Ethics Statement

   The studies involving human participants were reviewed and approved by
   Le Moyne College Institutional Review Board. The patients/participants
   provided their written informed consent to participate in this study.

Author Contributions

   The author confirms being the sole contributor of this work and has
   approved it for publication.

Conflict of Interest

   The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
   any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
   potential conflict of interest.

References

   Abeyta, A. A., Routledge, C., Roylance, C., Wildschut, T., and
   Sedikides, C. (2014). Attachment-related avoidance and the social and
   agentic content of nostalgic memories. J. Soc. Person. Relat. 32,
   406–413. doi: 10.1177/0265407514533770

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Barrett, F. S., Grimm, K. J., Robins, R. W., Wildschut, T., Sedikides,
   C., and Janata, P. (2010). Music-evoked nostalgia: affect, memory, and
   personality. Emotion 10, 390–403. doi: 10.1037/a0019006

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Batcho, K. I. (1995). Nostalgia: a psychological perspective. Percept.
   Mot. Skills 80, 131–143. doi: 10.2466/pms.1995.80.1.131

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Batcho, K. I. (1998). Personal nostalgia, world view, memory, and
   emotionality. Percept. Mot. Skills 87, 411–432. doi:
   10.2466/pms.1998.87.2.411

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Batcho, K. I. (2007). Nostalgia and the emotional tone and content of
   song lyrics. Am. J. Psychol. 120, 361–381.

   PubMed Abstract | Google Scholar

   Batcho, K. I. (2013). Nostalgia: retreat or support in difficult times?
   Am. J. Psychol. 126, 355–367.

   PubMed Abstract | Google Scholar

   Batcho, K. I. (2018). The role of nostalgia in resistance: a
   psychological perspective. Qual. Res. Psychol. 2018:1499835. doi:
   10.1080/14780887.2018.1499835

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Batcho, K. I. (2020). “Nostalgia: the paradoxical bittersweet emotion,”
   in Nostalgia Now: Cross-Disciplinary Perspectives on the Past in the
   Present, ed. M. H. Jacobsen (Abingdon: Routledge), 31–46. doi:
   10.4324/9780429287602-1

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Batcho, K. I., DaRin, M. L., Nave, A. M., and Yaworsky, R. R. (2008).
   Nostalgia and identity in song lyrics. Psychol. Aesthet. Creat. Arts 2,
   236–244. doi: 10.1037/1931-3896.2.4.236

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Batcho, K. I., Nave, A. M., and DaRin, M. L. (2011). A retrospective
   survey of childhood experiences. J. Happiness Stud. 12, 531–545. doi:
   10.1007/s10902-010-9213-y

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Batcho, K. I., and Shikh, S. (2016). Anticipatory nostalgia: missing
   the present before it’s gone. Pers. Individ. Differ. 98, 75–84. doi:
   10.1016/j.paid.2016.03.088

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Berger, C. R., Ha, Y., and Chen, M. (2019). Story appraisal theory:
   from story kernel appraisals to implications and impact. Commun. Res.
   46, 303–332. doi: 10.1177/0093650216641186

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Bergs, Y., Mitas, O., Smit, B., and Nawijn, J. (2019). Anticipatory
   nostalgia in experience design. Curr. Issues Tour. 2019:1669539. doi:
   10.1080/13683500.2019.1669539

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Cheung, W. Y., Hepper, E. G., Reid, C. A., Green, J. D., Wildschut, T.,
   and Sedikides, C. (2019). Anticipated nostalgia: looking forward to
   looking back. Cogn. Emot. 2019:1649247. doi:
   10.1080/02699931.2019.1649247

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Cheung, W. Y., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Hepper, E. G., Arndt, J.,
   and Vingerhoets, A. J. (2013). Back to the future: Nostalgia increases
   optimism. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 39, 1484–1496. doi:
   10.1177/0146167213499187

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Dunlop, S. M., More, E., and Romer, D. (2011). Where do youth learn
   about suicides on the Internet, and what influence does this have on
   suicidal ideation? J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 52, 1073–1080. doi:
   10.1111/j.1469-7610.2011.02416.x

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Garrido, S. (2018). The influence of personality and coping style on
   the affective outcomes of nostalgia: is nostalgia a healthy coping
   mechanism or rumination? Pers. Individ. Differ. 120, 259–264. doi:
   10.1016/j.paid.2016.07.021

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Habermas, T., and Diel, V. (2010). The emotional impact of loss
   narratives: event severity and narrative perspectives. Emotion 10,
   312–323. doi: 10.1037/a0018001

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Hart, C. M., Sedikides, C., Wildschut, T., Arndt, J., Routledge, C.,
   and Vingerhoets, A. J. J. M. (2011). Nostalgic recollections of high
   and low narcissists. J. Res. Pers. 45, 238–242. doi:
   10.1016/j.jrp.2011.01.002

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Hepper, E. G., Ritchie, T. D., Sedikides, C., and Wildschut, T. (2012).
   Odyssey’s end: lay conceptions of nostalgia reflect its original
   Homeric meaning. Emotion 12, 102–119. doi: 10.1037/a0025167

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Iyer, A., and Jetten, J. (2011). What’s left behind: identity
   continuity moderates the effect of nostalgia on well-being and life
   choices. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 101, 94–108. doi: 10.1037/a0022496

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Kaplan, H. A. (1987). The psychopathology of nostalgia. Psychoanal.
   Rev. 74, 465–486.

   PubMed Abstract | Google Scholar

   Kaplan, L. J. (1984). Adolescence: The Farewell to Childhood. New York,
   NY: Simon &amp; Schuster.

   Google Scholar

   Kiser, L. J., Baumgardner, B., and Dorado, J. (2010). Who are we, but
   for the stories we tell: family stories and healing. Psychol. Trauma 2,
   243–249. doi: 10.1037/a0019893

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Köneke, V. (2010). Nostalgia: More Bitter than Sweet. Munich: GRIN,
   doi: 10.3239/9783640942107

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Landrum, R. E., Brakke, K., and McCarthy, M. A. (2019). The pedagogical
   power of storytelling. Scholarsh. Teach. Learn. Psychol. 5, 247–253.

   Google Scholar

   Larsen, J. T., and McGraw, A. P. (2011). Further evidence for mixed
   emotions. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 100, 1095–1110. doi: 10.1037/a0021846

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Larsen, J. T., and McGraw, A. P. (2014). The case for mixed emotions.
   Soc. Pers. Psychol. Compass 8, 263–274. doi: 10.1111/spc3.12108

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Larsen, J. T., McGraw, A. P., and Cacioppo, J. T. (2001). Can people
   feel happy and sad at the same time? J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 81,
   684–696. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.81.4.684

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   McGinty, E. E., Webster, D. W., and Barry, C. L. (2013). Effects of
   news media messages about mass shootings on attitudes toward persons
   with serious mental illness and public support For gun control
   policies. Am. J. Psychiatry 170, 494–501. doi:
   10.1176/appi.ajp.2013.13010014

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Newman, D. B., Sachs, M. E., Stone, A. A., and Schwarz, N. (2019).
   Nostalgia and well-being in daily life: an ecological validity
   perspective. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 118, 325–347. doi:
   10.1037/pspp0000236

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Nussbaum, S., Trope, Y., and Liberman, N. (2003). Creeping
   dispositionism: the temporal dynamics of behavior prediction. J. Pers.
   Soc. Psychol. 84, 485–497. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.84.3.485

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Pratt, M. W., and Fiese, B. H. (eds) (2004). Family Stories and the
   Life Course: Across Time and Generations. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum
   Associates.

   Google Scholar

   Routledge, C., Arndt, J., Sedikides, C., and Wildschut, T. (2008). A
   blast from the past: the terror management function of nostalgia. J.
   Exp. Soc. Psychol. 44, 132–140. doi: 10.1016/j.jesp.2006.11.001

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Sedikides, C., Wildschut, T., Routledge, C., and Arndt, J. (2015).
   Nostalgia counteracts self-discontinuity and restores self-continuity.
   Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 45, 52–61. doi: 10.1002/ejsp.2073

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Seehusen, J., Cordaro, F., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Routledge, C.,
   Blackhart, G. C., et al. (2013). Individual differences in nostalgia
   proneness: the integrating role of the need to belong. Pers. Individ.
   Differ. 55, 904–908. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2013.07.020

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Stephan, E., Sedikides, C., and Wildschut, T. (2012). Mental travel
   into the past: differentiating recollections of nostalgic, ordinary,
   and positive events. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 42, 290–298. doi:
   10.1002/ejsp.1865

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Stephan, E., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Zhou, X., He, W., Routledge,
   C., et al. (2014). The mnemonic mover: Nostalgia regulates avoidance
   and approach motivation. Emotion 14, 545–561. doi: 10.1037/a0035673

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Stern, B. B. (1992). Historical and personal nostalgia in advertising
   text: the Fin de siecle effect. J. Advertising 21, 11–22. doi:
   10.1080/00913367.1992.10673382

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Watson, D., and Clark, L. A. (1994). The PANAS-X: Manual for the
   Positive and Negative Affect Schedule – Expanded Form. Iowa: The
   University of Iowa Press.

   Google Scholar

   Werman, D. S. (1977). Normal and pathological nostalgia. J. Am.
   Psychoanal. Assoc. 25, 387–398. doi: 10.1177/000306517702500205

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., and Alowidy, D. (2019). Hanin: Nostalgia
   among Syrian refugees. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 49, 1368–1384. doi:
   10.1002/ejsp.2590

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Arndt, J., and Routledge, C. (2006).
   Nostalgia: content, triggers, functions. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 91,
   975–993. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.91.5.975

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Routledge, C., Arndt, J., and Cordaro, F.
   (2010). Nostalgia as a repository of social connectedness: the role of
   attachment-related avoidance. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 98, 573–586. doi:
   10.1037/a0017597

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Zhou, X., Sedikides, C., Wildschut, T., and Gao, D. (2008).
   Counteracting loneliness: on the restorative function of nostalgia.
   Psychol. Sci. 19, 1023–1029. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02194.x

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Zinchenko, A. V. (2011). Nostalgia: dialogue between memory and
   knowing. J. Russ. East Eur. Psychol. 49, 84–97. doi:
   10.2753/rpo1061-0405490306

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

Appendix

Survey of Experience With Stories

   In general, how often have you been exposed to happy stories?

   In general, how often have you been exposed to sad stories?

   How happy do happy stories usually make you feel?

   How sad do sad stories usually make you feel?

   When you choose to watch a show or movie, read a story or read a news
   item online, how often do you choose a happy one?

   When you choose to watch a show or movie, read a story or read a news
   item online, how often do you choose a sad one?

   How often do you think you benefit or learn from a happy story?

   How often do you think you benefit or learn from a sad story?

   Keywords: personal nostalgia, anticipatory nostalgia, stories,
   personality, emotion

   Citation: Batcho KI (2020) When Nostalgia Tilts to Sad: Anticipatory
   and Personal Nostalgia. Front. Psychol. 11:1186. doi:
   10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01186

   Received: 14 February 2020; Accepted: 07 May 2020;
   Published: 29 May 2020.

   Edited by:
   Jeffrey D. Green, Virginia Commonwealth University, United States

   Reviewed by:
   Tim Wildschut, University of Southampton, United Kingdom
   Sandra Garrido, Western Sydney University, Australia

   Copyright © 2020 Batcho. This is an open-access article distributed
   under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY).
   The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted,
   provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited
   and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in
   accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
   reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.

   *Correspondence: Krystine I. Batcho, batcho@lemoyne.edu

This article is part of the Research Topic

   Current Issues in Nostalgia Research
   View all 13 Articles

People also looked at

   Download
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-25">
<text>
   The new PMC design is here! Learn more about navigating our updated
   article layout. The PMC legacy view will also be available for a
   limited time.
   (BUTTON)

   (BUTTON) Back to Top Skip to main content

   U.S. flag

   An official website of the United States government
   (BUTTON) Here's how you know
   Dot gov

   The .gov means it’s official.
   Federal government websites often end in .gov or .mil. Before sharing
   sensitive information, make sure you’re on a federal government site.
   Https

   The site is secure.
   The https:// ensures that you are connecting to the official website
   and that any information you provide is encrypted and transmitted
   securely.

   NIH NLM Logo
   Log in (BUTTON) Show account info
   (BUTTON) Close

Account

   Logged in as:
   username
     * Dashboard
     * Publications
     * Account settings
     * Log out

   Access keys NCBI Homepage MyNCBI Homepage Main Content Main Navigation

   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   Search PMC Full-Text Archive ____________________ (BUTTON) Search in
   PMC
   (BUTTON) Run this search in PubMed
     * Advanced Search
     * User Guide

   (BUTTON)

     * Journal List
     * Front Psychol
     * PMC7274075

Other Formats

     * PubReader
     * PDF (233K)

Actions

     * (BUTTON) Cite
     * Favorites

Share

     *
     *
     * (BUTTON)
       Permalink
       https://www.ncbi.nlm (BUTTON) Copy

RESOURCES

     * (BUTTON) Similar articles
     * (BUTTON) Cited by other articles
     * (BUTTON) Links to NCBI Databases

     * Journal List
     * Front Psychol
     * PMC7274075

   Logo of frontpsychol

   Front Psychol. 2020; 11: 1186.
   Published online 2020 May 29. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01186
   PMCID: PMC7274075
   PMID: 32547466

When Nostalgia Tilts to Sad: Anticipatory and Personal Nostalgia

   Krystine I. Batcho^*
   Author information Article notes Copyright and License information
   Disclaimer
   Le Moyne College, Syracuse, NY, United States
   Edited by: Jeffrey D. Green, Virginia Commonwealth University, United
   States
   Reviewed by: Tim Wildschut, University of Southampton, United Kingdom;
   Sandra Garrido, Western Sydney University, Australia
   *Correspondence: Krystine I. Batcho, ude.enyomel@ohctab
   This article was submitted to Personality and Social Psychology, a
   section of the journal Frontiers in Psychology
   Received 2020 Feb 14; Accepted 2020 May 7.
   Copyright [copyright] 2020 Batcho.
   This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the
   Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or
   reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original
   author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original
   publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted
   academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted
   which does not comply with these terms.

Associated Data

   Data Availability Statement
          The datasets for this article are not publicly available because
          participants were not so instructed. Requests to access the
          datasets should be directed to KB, ude.enyomel@ohctab.

Abstract

   Contemporary research has showcased many benefits of nostalgia, but its
   bittersweet character and historical reputation as unhealthy raise the
   possibility of less favorable impacts. In recent studies, daily diary
   data highlighted nostalgia's mixed valence and suggested that nostalgia
   is more strongly associated with negative feelings. Variables that
   influence the adaptive or maladaptive dimensions of nostalgia have not
   yet been fully explored. Recently, a focus on when nostalgia is
   experienced relative to past and future was introduced in the construct
   of anticipatory nostalgia, missing the present prematurely before it
   has become past. Distinct from personal nostalgia, anticipatory
   nostalgia was found to be characterized by difficulty enjoying the
   present and a tendency toward sadness and worry. The present study
   examines the distinctive dynamics at play in anticipatory and personal
   nostalgia by exploring the relationship between each type of
   dispositional nostalgia and reported experience with happy and sad
   stories. The Nostalgia Inventory, the Survey of Anticipatory Nostalgia,
   and a brief form of the PANAS were completed by 144 undergraduates (110
   women), who rated their exposure and reactions to happy and sad
   stories. Reported frequency of exposure to happy and sad stories was
   related to dispositional happiness and sadness. Personal and
   anticipatory nostalgia did not differ in frequency of exposure to happy
   and sad stories, but they did differ in reactivity to and learning from
   sad stories. Findings highlight the importance of the timing of
   nostalgia, consistent with the distinction between nostalgia for the
   past and nostalgia for what is still present.
   Keywords: personal nostalgia, anticipatory nostalgia, stories,
   personality, emotion

Introduction

   In contrast to nostalgia's dark origins in medical history as a disease
   construct, contemporary researchers have largely rediscovered nostalgia
   as a healthy psychological phenomenon. Empirical evidence has
   contradicted historical arguments that nostalgia reflects an inability
   to accept the loss of the past or serves as an obstacle to living in
   the present or moving forward (Werman, 1977; Kaplan, 1984, 1987).
   Presumed maladaptive qualities have been replaced by documented
   beneficial functions, including strengthened social connectedness,
   continuity of self, enhanced self-esteem, adaptive coping strategies,
   meaning in life, and comfort in the face of threatened mortality
   (Batcho, 1998, 2013; Wildschut et al., 2006, 2010; Batcho et al., 2008;
   Routledge et al., 2008; Zhou et al., 2008; Iyer and Jetten, 2011;
   Cheung et al., 2013; Stephan et al., 2014; Sedikides et al., 2015).

   However, recent research has revived questions about possible
   unfavorable aspects of nostalgia by highlighting its distinctive
   bittersweet nature (Larsen et al., 2001; Larsen and McGraw, 2011, 2014;
   Hepper et al., 2012). While most studies have found that nostalgia
   increases positive affect, instances of elevated negative affect,
   including sadness, have been identified (Zinchenko, 2011; Stephan et
   al., 2012; Newman et al., 2019). The extent to which nostalgia is
   uplifting and helpful or bitter and counterproductive might depend upon
   personality traits or contextual variables (Barrett et al., 2010;
   Koneke, 2010; Wildschut et al., 2010, 2019; Hart et al., 2011; Iyer and
   Jetten, 2011; Seehusen et al., 2013; Abeyta et al., 2014; Garrido,
   2018). One largely unexplored variable is the timing of nostalgia
   (Batcho, 2020). As an experience that unfolds over time, nostalgia's
   impact might depend upon the cognitive appraisal that directs the
   feelings and thoughts generated during a nostalgic episode.

   When nostalgia focuses on loss that has not yet occurred, the sadness
   of anticipated loss is premature and the experience becomes a
   paradoxical phenomenon of enjoying the present while missing it as if
   already relegated to the past. Dubbed anticipatory nostalgia, such
   premature nostalgia has been introduced as a construct in its own right
   (Batcho and Shikh, 2016; Bergs et al., 2019). A form of nostalgia by
   definition, it can be distinguished from personal nostalgia. Personal
   nostalgia is missing what has been lost, whereas anticipatory nostalgia
   involves missing what has not yet been lost. Anticipatory nostalgia
   depends upon mentally creating an imagined future that gives rise to
   missing what will be "someday past," yet still present. By engaging
   abstract construal, anticipatory nostalgia might engender psychological
   distance from the present, decreasing direct involvement in the current
   concrete reality (Nussbaum et al., 2003).

   Anticipatory nostalgia should not be confused with anticipated
   nostalgia. Anticipated nostalgia is the prediction or expectation that
   one will feel nostalgic for an aspect of the present in the future, not
   feeling nostalgic in the present. Predicting future nostalgia is an
   interesting cognitive process but not identical to the emotional
   phenomenon of feeling nostalgic before the future loss occurs. A person
   can expect to miss a loved one when they leave or die someday, but the
   expectation doesn't necessarily include the emotional component of
   nostalgic missing. Expecting future nostalgia has been shown to predict
   nostalgia after an important life transition. The finding of a greater
   likelihood of expecting future nostalgia for more positive experiences
   is not surprising, as people would be likely to expect to miss
   enjoyable or valued events. Expecting future nostalgia was associated
   with greater savoring of the experience, and post-transition nostalgia
   was associated with benefits, including enhanced self-esteem, social
   connectedness, and meaning in life (Cheung et al., 2019).

   By contrast, it is not clear whether anticipatory nostalgia, premature
   missing of what is still present, shares the benefits of nostalgia for
   the past. Despite eliciting the sadness of loss, anticipatory nostalgia
   might also allow reappraisal of the present. In spite of or because of
   the sadness, anticipating loss during adversity might encourage
   effective coping by strengthening appreciation of what is good in the
   present and providing the comfort of knowing that difficulties will not
   last. Initial empirical investigations to identify the benefits or
   disadvantages of anticipatory nostalgia assessed anticipatory nostalgia
   as a dispositional trait, that is, as the tendency of individuals to
   experience it generally. The early studies supported the viability of
   anticipatory nostalgia as a construct distinguishable from personal
   nostalgia (Batcho and Shikh, 2016). Unlike dispositional personal
   nostalgia, dispositional anticipatory nostalgia was characterized by a
   greater tendency for people and experiences to cause worry and sadness
   and was more likely to occur in adverse circumstances.

   The present study extends the early research by exploring the
   relationship between nostalgia and experience with stories. A
   substantial amount of the existing research on nostalgia has examined
   memories. Like memories, stories entail the past inherently by
   recounting what has happened in the past. Stories differ from memories
   in that the content of stories does not necessarily originate from an
   individual's own experience. Empirical research exploring stories is
   voluminous and well-established, but has focused primarily on
   identifying features of stories, context, and cognitive processing that
   influence retention and emotional and behavioral impacts (Habermas and
   Diel, 2010; Dunlop et al., 2011; McGinty et al., 2013; Berger et al.,
   2019; Landrum et al., 2019). Not yet adequately explored is the
   enduring or cumulative influence of emotional stories, especially those
   that convey personal meaning. Qualitative analyses have shown that
   personally relevant stories can exert a powerful lasting influence
   (Pratt and Fiese, 2004; Kiser et al., 2010). In their memoirs, members
   of the resistance during World War II explained how stories encountered
   during childhood generated nostalgia and played pivotal roles in their
   dedication to the resistance, even to the point of enduring hardships
   and risking death (Batcho, 2018).

   The present work introduced a focus on accumulated exposure to stories
   over time. In an investigation of the relationship between overall
   exposure to stories and personal and anticipatory nostalgia,
   participants estimated and shared their experience with happy and sad
   stories. If experiencing nostalgia prematurely is less adaptive than
   missing what is already past, anticipatory nostalgia will be aligned
   with unfavorable reactions to stories, whereas personal nostalgia will
   be associated with positive reactions. In particular, exposure to happy
   and sad stories was examined to explore whether dispositional
   anticipatory nostalgia is associated with greater exposure, reactivity,
   or attraction to sad stories. If the association of anticipatory
   nostalgia with sadness reflects an overall sad disposition,
   anticipatory nostalgia would be expected to correlate with greater
   exposure to or recall of sad stories. If anticipatory nostalgia
   develops in response to sad experiences, reported exposure to sad
   stories would be expected to correlate with anticipatory nostalgia.
   However, prior research has not examined the possibility of cognitive
   benefits. If anticipating future loss entails helpful cognitive
   processing, anticipatory nostalgia will be associated with greater
   likelihood of learning from sad stories.

Methods

Participants

   A sample of 144 undergraduates, 110 women and 34 men, ranging in age
   from 18 to 39 years (Mdn = 20, SD = 2.65), completed the study. In
   accordance with ethical norms of the American Psychological
   Association, participants were offered either a small stipend or
   optional extra credit for a course for their participation. The offer
   of a stipend helped recruit students majoring in different disciplines.

Material and Procedure

   All procedures and material for the study were reviewed and approved by
   the college Institutional Review Board for compliance with ethical
   guidelines. In small groups in a laboratory room, participants
   completed paper forms of the Nostalgia Inventory, the Survey of
   Anticipatory Nostalgia, selected items from Watson and Clark's (1994)
   Positive and Negative Affect Schedule-Expanded Form (PANAS-X), and a
   survey of experience with happy and sad stories constructed for this
   study.

   The Nostalgia Inventory assessed personal nostalgia as a dispositional
   trait (Batcho, 1995, 1998, 2007). Consistent with Stern's (1992)
   definition of nostalgia as the longing for one's past, respondents rate
   the extent to which they miss each of 20 items from when they were
   younger on a 9-point scale (1 = Not at all, 9 = Very much). The
   inventory is reported to have a split-half reliability of 0.78 and
   1-week test-retest reliability of 0.84 (Batcho, 1995), an acceptable
   level of internal consistency of 0.86 as measured by Cronbach's alpha
   (Batcho et al., 2008), and test-retest reliability of 0.82 over a
   4-week interval (Batcho et al., 2011). Consistent with prior research,
   the Nostalgia Inventory yielded an acceptable level of internal
   consistency of 0.88 as measured by Cronbach's alpha and a split-half
   reliability of 0.81 in this study.

   The Survey of Anticipatory Nostalgia focuses on future loss rather than
   the past (e.g., "society will change"). Given a 9-point scale (1 =
   rarely/not very, 9 = very often/very much), respondents were
   instructed: "Sometimes we realize that something won't last forever. It
   can be an activity, a thing, or time with a person or group. Using the
   scale below, CIRCLE a number to estimate how often or to what extent
   you feel like you already miss each of the items before the change has
   happened." The survey is reported to have a split-half reliability of
   0.83, 4-week test-retest reliability of 0.71, and internal consistency
   as measured by Cronbach's alpha of 0.87 (Batcho and Shikh, 2016).
   Consistent with prior research, internal consistency as measured by
   Cronbach's alpha was 0.88, and split-half reliability measured 0.79 in
   this study.

   As in prior research (Batcho and Shikh, 2016), mean ratings on the
   Nostalgia Inventory correlated moderately with mean ratings on the
   Survey of Anticipatory Nostalgia, r[(][142][)] = 0.52, p <lt; 0.001.

   The Survey of Experience with Stories (Appendix) included eight items
   asking participants to rate their experience with stories on a 9-point
   scale (1 = rarely/not at all, 9 = very often/very much). Participants
   rated how often they had been exposed to happy and to sad stories in
   general, how happy and how sad happy and sad stories made them feel,
   how often they choose happy and sad stories, and how often they benefit
   or learn from happy and sad stories. Participants were asked to
   describe the earliest happy and sad story they remember, as well as
   additional happy and sad stories. They were instructed: "You might have
   read it or it might have been told to you, read to you, depicted in a
   video or film, or have been a news story. You might have thought it was
   a true story or a fictional one."

   Consistent with prior research (Batcho and Shikh, 2016), six items were
   selected (cheerful, happy, joyful, sad, blue, and downhearted) from the
   PANAS-X (Watson and Clark, 1994). Given the dispositional or trait
   instruction, participants rated the extent to which they had felt each
   item "in general, that is, on the average" on a 5-point scale (1 = very
   slightly or not at all, 5 = extremely).

Results

Gender

   Men and women did not differ in average personal nostalgia scores, t(1,
   142) = +/-1.768, p = 0.084, [eta][p]^2 = 0.029, but women (M = 6.00, SD
   = 1.18) scored higher in anticipatory nostalgia than did men (M = 5.24,
   SD = 1.20), t(1, 142) = +/-3.29, p = 0.001, [eta][p]^2 = 0.071.

Nostalgia and Positive and Negative Affect

   Ratings of PANAS-X items of generalized affect yielded additional
   evidence for anticipatory nostalgia as a distinct construct. Ratings
   from the three items cheerful, happy, and joyful were averaged to yield
   a composite measure of a tendency toward happiness. Ratings from the
   three items sad, blue, and downhearted were averaged to serve as a
   measure of sadness. Personal nostalgia was not correlated with
   happiness, r[(][142][)] = 0.06, p = 0.476, or sadness, r[(][142][)] =
   0.12, p = 0.136, whereas anticipatory nostalgia correlated
   significantly with sadness, r[(][142][)] = 0.21, p = 0.012, but not
   with happiness, r[(][142][)] = 0.14, p = 0.087.

Stories

Nostalgia and Experience With Happy and Sad Stories

   The relationship of personal and anticipatory nostalgia to exposure and
   reactions to happy and sad stories was explored in correlational
   analyses, with gender and dispositional sadness and happiness
   controlled (Table 1). Frequency of exposure to happy and sad stories
   was assessed in two ways. Participants were asked to rate overall
   exposure by rating how often they encountered happy and sad stories.
   They also recalled happy and sad stories in open-ended essays, and the
   number of stories reported served as an additional measure of exposure.
   Participants were free to recall as many stories as they could without
   a time limit. Subjective estimates and recall entail different
   cognitive processes. Consistent with such differences, the ratings and
   number of stories recalled were not correlated for happy stories,
   r[(][142][)] = 0.01, p = 0.922, or sad stories, r[(][142][)] = 0.11, p
   = 0.197, and served as independent measures. Neither type of nostalgia
   correlated significantly with either indicator of frequency of exposure
   to happy and sad stories, suggesting that people prone to personal or
   anticipatory nostalgia have not experienced happy and sad stories more
   or less often. Attraction to or preference for sad or happy stories was
   assessed by asking participants to rate how often they choose happy and
   sad stories. Neither type of nostalgia correlated significantly with
   story choice, suggesting that proneness to personal or anticipatory
   nostalgia does not reflect an underlying bias or preference for happy
   or sad material.

TABLE 1

   Partial correlations of personal and anticipatory nostalgia with
   exposure and reactions to stories with gender and dispositional
   happiness and sadness controlled.
   Personal
   nostalgia
     __________________________________________________________________

   Anticipatory
   nostalgia
     __________________________________________________________________

                               r    p    r     p
   Number of happy stories   -0.04 0.634 0.03 0.743
   Number of sad stories     0.02 0.829 0.06 0.466
   Ratings
   Exposure to happy stories 0.03 0.693 0.02 0.777
   Exposure to sad stories   0.11 0.209 0.06 0.452
   Choice of happy stories   0.13 0.118 0.09 0.303
   Choice of sad stories     0.05 0.565 0.14 0.102
   Happy stories make happy  0.19 0.026 0.03 0.694
   Sad stories make sad      0.23 0.007 0.21 0.012
   Learn from happy stories  0.16 0.052 0.09 0.294
   Learn from sad stories    0.05 0.584 0.21 0.012
   Open in a separate window
   N = 142. Controlled for gender and dispositional sadness and happiness
   measured by PANAS-X. PANAS-X happiness composite included Cheerful,
   Joyful, Happy. Sadness composite included Sad, Blue, Downhearted.

   However, ratings suggested that they react differently to happy and sad
   stories emotionally and cognitively. Emotionally, personal and
   anticipatory nostalgia both correlated with sadness induced by sad
   stories, but only personal nostalgia correlated significantly with
   happiness elicited by happy stories. Results suggested that personal
   and anticipatory nostalgia differed in cognitive engagement with
   stories. Personal nostalgia correlated with learning from happy
   stories, whereas anticipatory nostalgia correlated with learning from
   sad stories. Consistent with prior findings of an association between
   anticipatory nostalgia and a tendency to be made sad by people and
   events, these results suggested that people prone to anticipatory
   nostalgia may be less reactive to happy stories. Present findings
   suggested that people prone to anticipatory nostalgia process sad
   stories in more productive ways, whereas people prone to personal
   nostalgia are more reactive to happy stories and process happy stories
   in beneficial ways.

Contributions of Nostalgia and Stories to Mood

   The contributions of nostalgia and stories to dispositional mood were
   explored further in linear regression analyses (Table 2). The composite
   happiness ratings were examined in a linear regression analysis, with
   gender and mean ratings from the Nostalgia Inventory and the Survey of
   Anticipatory Nostalgia independent variables. The role of stories was
   explored with the inclusion of mean ratings of frequency of exposure to
   happy and sad stories, degree of happiness (sadness) induced by happy
   (sad) stories, and learning from happy and sad stories.

TABLE 2

   Summary of regression analyses on dispositional mood.
   Dispositional mood                    B    SE  [beta]   t     p
   Dispositional happiness
   Gender                              -0.01 0.13 -0.01  -0.03 0.980
   Personal nostalgia                  -0.04 0.05 -0.08  -0.89 0.375
   Anticipatory nostalgia              0.06  0.06  0.10  1.03  0.306
   Exposure to happy stories           0.10  0.04  0.23  2.75  0.007
   Exposure to sad stories             0.04  0.03  0.09  1.13  0.261
   Happiness elicited by happy stories 0.19  0.05  0.36  3.82  0.000
   Sadness elicited by sad stories     -0.04 0.04 -0.10  -1.20 0.232
   Learning from happy stories         0.02  0.04  0.04  0.44  0.660
   Learning from sad stories           0.02  0.03  0.04  0.52  0.604
   Dispositional sadness
   Gender                              0.10  0.18  0.05  0.56  0.580
   Personal nostalgia                  -0.01 0.07 -0.02  -0.20 0.844
   Anticipatory nostalgia              0.11  0.07  0.15  1.47  0.145
   Exposure to happy stories           -0.04 0.05 -0.08  -0.87 0.386
   Exposure to sad stories             0.10  0.04  0.21  2.40  0.018
   Happiness elicited by happy stories 0.03  0.07  0.05  0.52  0.602
   Sadness elicited by sad stories     0.08  0.05  0.15  1.60  0.113
   Learning from happy stories         0.01  0.05  0.01  0.14  0.890
   Learning from sad stories           0.01  0.04  0.01  0.04  0.970
   Open in a separate window
   N = 143.

   In a significant model, F(9, 133) = 5.53, p <lt; 0.001, Adjusted R^2 =
   0.223, gender, personal nostalgia, and anticipatory nostalgia were not
   significant. Dispositional happiness was predicted by the frequency of
   exposure to happy, but not sad stories. Similarly, happiness was
   predicted by the degree to which happy stories induce happiness, but
   not by the degree to which sad stories induce sadness, consistent with
   an affect-specific effect. The absence of significant effects of
   learning from happy or sad stories was consistent with a distinction
   between affective and cognitive impacts.

   A parallel analysis was conducted with the composite sadness ratings as
   the dependent variable. In a significant model, F(9, 133) = 1.92, p =
   0.05, Adjusted R^2 = 0.055, gender, personal nostalgia, and
   anticipatory nostalgia were not significant. Dispositional sadness was
   predicted by the frequency of exposure to sad, but not happy stories.
   However, sadness was not predicted by the sadness elicited by sad
   stories, happiness induced by happy stories, or learning from sad or
   happy stories.

Limitations

   This study introduced a focus on stories as a vehicle for comparing
   emotional and cognitive reactions to cumulative meaningful experiences
   associated with personal and anticipatory nostalgia. Not allowing
   causal relationships to be determined, this exploratory study
   encourages future research based on experimental designs to identify
   variables responsible for the differences between personal and
   anticipatory nostalgia. Further research is needed also to explore
   participant variables in samples characterized by broader demographic
   and diversity constituents.

   A fuller understanding of adaptive functions of nostalgia would be
   advanced with studies that identify the nature and content of the
   stories participants prone to personal or anticipatory nostalgia were
   exposed to and remember. Similarly, future work is needed to determine
   how those prone to nostalgia learn or benefit from happy or sad
   stories. Qualitative analyses of the impactful stories can yield
   insights into the nature of the lessons acquired.

Discussion

   The present findings reinforced the importance of when nostalgia is
   felt relative to past and future. Results are consistent with the view
   of anticipatory nostalgia as distinguishable from personal nostalgia
   and worthy of further research as a distinct phenomenon. Stories were
   shown to be effective material for elucidating the roles of emotional
   and cognitive processes in personal and anticipatory nostalgia.
   Exploring reactions to stories can clarify the adaptive and maladaptive
   functions of nostalgia within a meaningful practical context. Access to
   24 h news cycles and online venues have expanded the influence of the
   content and format of stories. The current findings highlight the
   importance of future research to understand the impact of immersion in
   a story-rich environment.

   The present study suggests the possibility of a cumulative contribution
   of experience with stories to emotional well-being. Greater exposure to
   happy stories correlated with higher levels of dispositional happiness,
   and greater exposure to sad stories correlated with higher levels of
   dispositional sadness. The overall pattern of relationships is
   interesting. While dispositional happiness was related to the degree to
   which stories elicited happiness, sadness was related to experience
   with sad stories regardless of the degree of sadness the stories
   elicited. The present findings suggest that the emotional impact of a
   story depends in part upon the emotional and cognitive reactivity of
   the listener or viewer.

   Pertinent to the current study, personal and anticipatory nostalgia
   were distinguished by different ways of interacting with stories. There
   was no evidence that differential exposure to happy and sad stories
   accounted for the distinction. Personal and anticipatory nostalgia both
   correlated with being made sad by sad stories, suggesting that
   participants prone to anticipatory nostalgia are not more sensitive to
   sad stories. However, only personal nostalgia was associated with being
   made happy by happy stories, suggesting that anticipatory nostalgia may
   be associated with less reactivity to happy stories. Furthermore,
   personal nostalgia was related to greater likelihood of learning from
   happy stories, whereas anticipatory nostalgia was associated with
   greater likelihood of learning from sad stories.

   Prior research differentiated personal and anticipatory nostalgia by
   their relationships to happiness and sadness. Personal and anticipatory
   nostalgia both include missing, longing or yearning. In personal
   nostalgia, we enjoy valued aspects of our past again, thereby enjoying
   them twice. In anticipatory nostalgia, we have only the present to
   enjoy them. In fact, we feel the sadness of missing them twice, once in
   the actual present and once in the imagined future. Envisioning what
   the future might bring can be accompanied by sadness missing the
   present and worry about what will come next. In prior research,
   participants prone to anticipatory nostalgia had reported a greater
   tendency for people and experiences to cause them worry and sadness,
   but anticipatory nostalgia did not predict generalized sadness.
   Consistent with prior research, anticipatory nostalgia did not
   contribute to generalized sadness in this study, suggesting that people
   prone to anticipatory nostalgia are not generally unhappy.

   Given that personal and anticipatory nostalgia are both emotional
   constructs, theorists are justified in comparing their emotional
   facets. The present findings highlight the wisdom of considering also
   the cognitive dynamics in the relationship of nostalgia to the impact
   of stories. Rather than generally unhappy, people prone to anticipatory
   nostalgia may be more likely to benefit from sad stories by learning
   ways of coping with current or future problems and anxiety. Their
   inclination to imagine the future as present may reflect conceptual
   thinking that enables them to apply lessons from stories to their own
   lives. It remains for future investigations to identify the variables
   or conditions underlying the emotional and cognitive dynamics that
   distinguish personal from anticipatory nostalgia.

   The present findings encourage further research to determine the
   long-term effects of being immersed in happy or sad stories. The
   relationship of learning from sad stories with anticipatory nostalgia
   suggests that benefiting from stories may be facilitated by an ability
   to imagine how the survival or resolution of sadness in a story might
   apply to an individual's own life. Just as the sadness of future loss
   can be experienced before it is actualized, in adverse times, imagining
   when difficulties will have been overcome can be a source of
   consolation. But looking ahead brings the sad realization that the good
   of the present might be gone too. Future research is needed to
   determine if anticipatory nostalgia can be constructive in certain
   circumstances or applied therapeutically to remind people that time and
   the opportunity to be engaged in the present is fleeting. Sad stories
   may provide opportunities to deal with adversity safely from a
   distance, as anticipatory nostalgia allows loss to be confronted from a
   temporal distance.

   In a digital age, children are growing up with expanding opportunities
   for exposure to stories with negative content presented in graphic
   media without the comforting presence of adults who can contribute
   meaningful perspective. The cumulative impact over time is not yet
   known, but the present findings suggest greater dispositional sadness
   with increasing exposure to sad stories. Current findings highlight the
   importance of identifying ways of cultivating traits or
   cognitive-emotional resources to buffer adverse outcomes. While sadness
   might be considered a maladaptive affective dimension of anticipatory
   nostalgia, the benefits of learning from sad material may suggest there
   are untapped adaptive cognitive functions of anticipatory nostalgia.

Data Availability Statement

   The datasets for this article are not publicly available because
   participants were not so instructed. Requests to access the datasets
   should be directed to KB, ude.enyomel@ohctab.

Ethics Statement

   The studies involving human participants were reviewed and approved by
   Le Moyne College Institutional Review Board. The patients/participants
   provided their written informed consent to participate in this study.

Author Contributions

   The author confirms being the sole contributor of this work and has
   approved it for publication.

Conflict of Interest

   The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
   any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
   potential conflict of interest.

Appendix

Survey of Experience With Stories

   In general, how often have you been exposed to happy stories?

   In general, how often have you been exposed to sad stories?

   How happy do happy stories usually make you feel?

   How sad do sad stories usually make you feel?

   When you choose to watch a show or movie, read a story or read a news
   item online, how often do you choose a happy one?

   When you choose to watch a show or movie, read a story or read a news
   item online, how often do you choose a sad one?

   How often do you think you benefit or learn from a happy story?

   How often do you think you benefit or learn from a sad story?

References

     * Abeyta A. A., Routledge C., Roylance C., Wildschut T., Sedikides C.
       (2014). Attachment-related avoidance and the social and agentic
       content of nostalgic memories. J. Soc. Person. Relat. 32 406-413.
       10.1177/0265407514533770 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Barrett F. S., Grimm K. J., Robins R. W., Wildschut T., Sedikides
       C., Janata P. (2010). Music-evoked nostalgia: affect, memory, and
       personality. Emotion 10 390-403. 10.1037/a0019006 [PubMed]
       [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Batcho K. I. (1995). Nostalgia: a psychological perspective.
       Percept. Mot. Skills 80 131-143. 10.2466/pms.1995.80.1.131 [PubMed]
       [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Batcho K. I. (1998). Personal nostalgia, world view, memory, and
       emotionality. Percept. Mot. Skills 87 411-432.
       10.2466/pms.1998.87.2.411 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Batcho K. I. (2007). Nostalgia and the emotional tone and content
       of song lyrics. Am. J. Psychol. 120 361-381. [PubMed] [Google
       Scholar]
     * Batcho K. I. (2013). Nostalgia: retreat or support in difficult
       times? Am. J. Psychol. 126 355-367. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Batcho K. I. (2018). The role of nostalgia in resistance: a
       psychological perspective. Qual. Res. Psychol. 2018:1499835
       10.1080/14780887.2018.1499835 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Batcho K. I. (2020). "Nostalgia: the paradoxical bittersweet
       emotion," in Nostalgia Now: Cross-Disciplinary Perspectives on the
       Past in the Present, ed. Jacobsen M. H. (Abingdon: Routledge; ),
       31-46. 10.4324/9780429287602-1 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Batcho K. I., DaRin M. L., Nave A. M., Yaworsky R. R. (2008).
       Nostalgia and identity in song lyrics. Psychol. Aesthet. Creat.
       Arts 2 236-244. 10.1037/1931-3896.2.4.236 [CrossRef] [Google
       Scholar]
     * Batcho K. I., Nave A. M., DaRin M. L. (2011). A retrospective
       survey of childhood experiences. J. Happiness Stud. 12 531-545.
       10.1007/s10902-010-9213-y [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Batcho K. I., Shikh S. (2016). Anticipatory nostalgia: missing the
       present before it's gone. Pers. Individ. Differ. 98 75-84.
       10.1016/j.paid.2016.03.088 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Berger C. R., Ha Y., Chen M. (2019). Story appraisal theory: from
       story kernel appraisals to implications and impact. Commun. Res. 46
       303-332. 10.1177/0093650216641186 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Bergs Y., Mitas O., Smit B., Nawijn J. (2019). Anticipatory
       nostalgia in experience design. Curr. Issues Tour. 2019:1669539
       10.1080/13683500.2019.1669539 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Cheung W. Y., Hepper E. G., Reid C. A., Green J. D., Wildschut T.,
       Sedikides C. (2019). Anticipated nostalgia: looking forward to
       looking back. Cogn. Emot. 2019:1649247.
       10.1080/02699931.2019.1649247 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Cheung W. Y., Wildschut T., Sedikides C., Hepper E. G., Arndt J.,
       Vingerhoets A. J. (2013). Back to the future: Nostalgia increases
       optimism. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 39 1484-1496.
       10.1177/0146167213499187 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Dunlop S. M., More E., Romer D. (2011). Where do youth learn about
       suicides on the Internet, and what influence does this have on
       suicidal ideation? J. Child Psychol. Psychiatry 52 1073-1080.
       10.1111/j.1469-7610.2011.02416.x [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google
       Scholar]
     * Garrido S. (2018). The influence of personality and coping style on
       the affective outcomes of nostalgia: is nostalgia a healthy coping
       mechanism or rumination? Pers. Individ. Differ. 120 259-264.
       10.1016/j.paid.2016.07.021 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Habermas T., Diel V. (2010). The emotional impact of loss
       narratives: event severity and narrative perspectives. Emotion 10
       312-323. 10.1037/a0018001 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Hart C. M., Sedikides C., Wildschut T., Arndt J., Routledge C.,
       Vingerhoets A. J. J. M. (2011). Nostalgic recollections of high and
       low narcissists. J. Res. Pers. 45 238-242.
       10.1016/j.jrp.2011.01.002 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Hepper E. G., Ritchie T. D., Sedikides C., Wildschut T. (2012).
       Odyssey's end: lay conceptions of nostalgia reflect its original
       Homeric meaning. Emotion 12 102-119. 10.1037/a0025167 [PubMed]
       [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Iyer A., Jetten J. (2011). What's left behind: identity continuity
       moderates the effect of nostalgia on well-being and life choices.
       J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 101 94-108. 10.1037/a0022496 [PubMed]
       [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Kaplan H. A. (1987). The psychopathology of nostalgia. Psychoanal.
       Rev. 74 465-486. [PubMed] [Google Scholar]
     * Kaplan L. J. (1984). Adolescence: The Farewell to Childhood. New
       York, NY: Simon &amp; Schuster. [Google Scholar]
     * Kiser L. J., Baumgardner B., Dorado J. (2010). Who are we, but for
       the stories we tell: family stories and healing. Psychol. Trauma 2
       243-249. 10.1037/a0019893 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef]
       [Google Scholar]
     * Koneke V. (2010). Nostalgia: More Bitter than Sweet. Munich: GRIN,
       10.3239/9783640942107 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Landrum R. E., Brakke K., McCarthy M. A. (2019). The pedagogical
       power of storytelling. Scholarsh. Teach. Learn. Psychol. 5 247-253.
       [Google Scholar]
     * Larsen J. T., McGraw A. P. (2011). Further evidence for mixed
       emotions. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 100 1095-1110. 10.1037/a0021846
       [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Larsen J. T., McGraw A. P. (2014). The case for mixed emotions.
       Soc. Pers. Psychol. Compass 8 263-274. 10.1111/spc3.12108
       [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Larsen J. T., McGraw A. P., Cacioppo J. T. (2001). Can people feel
       happy and sad at the same time? J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 81 684-696.
       10.1037/0022-3514.81.4.684 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * McGinty E. E., Webster D. W., Barry C. L. (2013). Effects of news
       media messages about mass shootings on attitudes toward persons
       with serious mental illness and public support For gun control
       policies. Am. J. Psychiatry 170 494-501.
       10.1176/appi.ajp.2013.13010014 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Newman D. B., Sachs M. E., Stone A. A., Schwarz N. (2019).
       Nostalgia and well-being in daily life: an ecological validity
       perspective. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 118 325-347.
       10.1037/pspp0000236 [PMC free article] [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google
       Scholar]
     * Nussbaum S., Trope Y., Liberman N. (2003). Creeping dispositionism:
       the temporal dynamics of behavior prediction. J. Pers. Soc.
       Psychol. 84 485-497. 10.1037/0022-3514.84.3.485 [PubMed] [CrossRef]
       [Google Scholar]
     * Pratt M. W., Fiese B. H. (eds) (2004). Family Stories and the Life
       Course: Across Time and Generations. New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum
       Associates. [Google Scholar]
     * Routledge C., Arndt J., Sedikides C., Wildschut T. (2008). A blast
       from the past: the terror management function of nostalgia. J. Exp.
       Soc. Psychol. 44 132-140. 10.1016/j.jesp.2006.11.001 [CrossRef]
       [Google Scholar]
     * Sedikides C., Wildschut T., Routledge C., Arndt J. (2015).
       Nostalgia counteracts self-discontinuity and restores
       self-continuity. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 45 52-61. 10.1002/ejsp.2073
       [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Seehusen J., Cordaro F., Wildschut T., Sedikides C., Routledge C.,
       Blackhart G. C., et al. (2013). Individual differences in nostalgia
       proneness: the integrating role of the need to belong. Pers.
       Individ. Differ. 55 904-908. 10.1016/j.paid.2013.07.020 [CrossRef]
       [Google Scholar]
     * Stephan E., Sedikides C., Wildschut T. (2012). Mental travel into
       the past: differentiating recollections of nostalgic, ordinary, and
       positive events. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 42 290-298.
       10.1002/ejsp.1865 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Stephan E., Wildschut T., Sedikides C., Zhou X., He W., Routledge
       C., et al. (2014). The mnemonic mover: Nostalgia regulates
       avoidance and approach motivation. Emotion 14 545-561.
       10.1037/a0035673 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Stern B. B. (1992). Historical and personal nostalgia in
       advertising text: the Fin de siecle effect. J. Advertising 21
       11-22. 10.1080/00913367.1992.10673382 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Watson D., Clark L. A. (1994). The PANAS-X: Manual for the Positive
       and Negative Affect Schedule - Expanded Form. Iowa: The University
       of Iowa Press. [Google Scholar]
     * Werman D. S. (1977). Normal and pathological nostalgia. J. Am.
       Psychoanal. Assoc. 25 387-398. 10.1177/000306517702500205 [PubMed]
       [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Wildschut T., Sedikides C., Alowidy D. (2019). Hanin: Nostalgia
       among Syrian refugees. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 49 1368-1384.
       10.1002/ejsp.2590 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Wildschut T., Sedikides C., Arndt J., Routledge C. (2006).
       Nostalgia: content, triggers, functions. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 91
       975-993. 10.1037/0022-3514.91.5.975 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google
       Scholar]
     * Wildschut T., Sedikides C., Routledge C., Arndt J., Cordaro F.
       (2010). Nostalgia as a repository of social connectedness: the role
       of attachment-related avoidance. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 98 573-586.
       10.1037/a0017597 [PubMed] [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     * Zhou X., Sedikides C., Wildschut T., Gao D. (2008). Counteracting
       loneliness: on the restorative function of nostalgia. Psychol. Sci.
       19 1023-1029. 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02194.x [PubMed] [CrossRef]
       [Google Scholar]
     * Zinchenko A. V. (2011). Nostalgia: dialogue between memory and
       knowing. J. Russ. East Eur. Psychol. 49 84-97.
       10.2753/rpo1061-0405490306 [CrossRef] [Google Scholar]
     __________________________________________________________________

   Articles from Frontiers in Psychology are provided here courtesy of
   Frontiers Media SA
     __________________________________________________________________

Other Formats

     * PubReader
     * PDF (233K)

Actions

     * (BUTTON) Cite
     * Favorites

Share

     *
     *
     * (BUTTON)
       Permalink
       https://www.ncbi.nlm (BUTTON) Copy

RESOURCES

     * (BUTTON) Similar articles
     * (BUTTON) Cited by other articles
     * (BUTTON) Links to NCBI Databases

   (BUTTON) [x]
   Cite
   (BUTTON) Copy Download .nbib .nbib
   Format: [NLM]

   Follow NCBI

   Connect with NLM
     *
     *
     *

   National Library of Medicine
   8600 Rockville Pike
   Bethesda, MD 20894

   Web Policies
   FOIA
   HHS Vulnerability Disclosure

   Help
   Accessibility
   Careers
     * NLM
     * NIH
     * HHS
     * USA.gov
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-27">
<text>
   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-NPW2BR4

   (BUTTON)
   Exploring your mind Exploring your mind La Mente es Maravillosa
   (BUTTON) (BUTTON)

    1.
    2. Psychology

Collective Nostalgia for the Past

   4 minutes
   Collective Nostalgia for the Past Collective Nostalgia for the Past

   Last update: 08 March, 2018
   Nostalgia as pictured by a pocket watch in the sun.
   Nostalgia as pictured by a pocket watch in the sun. Nostalgia as
   pictured by a pocket watch in the sun.
   We all feel nostalgic sometimes. We wish we were back in a certain
   time, a certain situation, something that’s already happened. We suffer
   over something that’s gone now, something we had and then lost. Maybe
   it’s about a person, a group (collective nostalgia), an object, or an
   event.

   There are also two different kinds of nostalgia, and the difference is
   very important. The first kind is a positive feeling, a nice memory of
   an object that’s gone or lost to time. The second kind is a negative
   feeling. It’s a feeling of pain over something you can’t get back
   again, yet you hope for it to come back.
   Black and white photos.
   Black and white photos. Black and white photos.

Nostalgia for people

   Probably the first thing you think of when it comes to nostalgia is
   desire for a loved one. Breakups, distance, or death are some things
   that give us that longing feeling. But nostalgia isn’t any less
   important when its object is a place instead of a person.

   There’s a word in Spanish to talk about that kind of nostalgia, the
   kind that mixes melancholy and wishing for your homeland: “morriña.”
   The word comes from the Galician language. They say that “morriña” is a
   longing for the land you come from. It means missing the place where
   you’re from, on top of whatever things, objects, and situations it
   calls to mind.

   “Look into my nostalgia and tell me what you see.”
   -Xavier Velasco-

Collective nostalgia

   There’s another kind of nostalgia for situations or things of the past.
   It’s called collective nostalgia. What it means is a shared longing for
   what society used to be like.

   At some point in our lives, we’ve all heard someone say “back in my day
   things were different.” But comparing two different time periods is
   never fair. Memory gets distorted over time, so you might end up
   longing for a past that actually never was. Your selective memory will
   only recall events that make you feel even more nostalgic.

   In some parts of the world, a good portion of the population harbors a
   longing for dictatorships. They talk about how great they were. They
   sigh about how there’s no firm hand in these modern times, crying out
   for a strong, charismatic leader who will make their nation great
   again.

   But obviously those longings leave out important parts of the past and
   present. They don’t think about all the freedoms that come along with
   that authoritarian regime being over. They never mention the crimes
   that people might have committed in the past they want back so much.

   A scene of Colombia, rooftops.
   A scene of Colombia, rooftops. A scene of Colombia, rooftops.

   These people live in their own little world, a total distortion of
   reality. And by fantasizing like that they end up glorifying the past
   and people in it. Just think about people who worship
   horrendous historical figures like Hitler or Mussolini. Even if they
   created some progress for their societies, the crimes they committed
   should bury any nostalgic feelings at all.

Nostalgia as motivation

   Collective nostalgia, being the group emotion that it is, can
   powerfully shape a group’s behavior. When you share a longing for a
   specific kind of world with the majority of people in your group, it’s
   much easier to act. And if a large group wants to bring the past into
   the present, they might turn to violence if their other methods don’t
   work.

   Collective nostalgia can sometimes be a good prediction for collective
   action. The more intense the group emotion is, the more likely it is
   people will take to the streets. They will be more likely to cry out
   for the thing they desire, their glorious past. But the relationship
   isn’t actually that simple, and emotions will completely control it.
   But those emotions will mostly be negative.

   Rage and contempt can end up mobilizing the group if they direct them
   towards other people. When one group feels nostalgic about how society
   used to be and decides that some other group is guilty and stopping
   them from reclaiming their past, negative emotions and defensive
   actions are even more likely. These actions range from things that fit
   into norms or laws to things that cross into illegal territory, like
   vandalism or violence.
   Three friends looking with collective nostalgia at the foggy valley.
   Three friends looking with collective nostalgia at the foggy valley.
   Three friends looking with collective nostalgia at the foggy valley.

Collective nostalgia for good

   But collective nostalgia doesn’t have to be negative. If the longing is
   about people’s old ideas of their country, they’ll have to think about
   how that country really was. Or even better, they’ll think about what
   exactly they long for about that country.

   If their nostalgia is about values like openness and tolerance, any
   actions they take will have more liberal goals. Granted, that doesn’t
   mean the methods they use to achieve those goals will be open and
   tolerant.

   If you have the ability to shape your nostalgia, make it your
   motivation to create a better world. Miss freedom and not restriction,
   miss diversity and not exclusion.
   It might interest you...
   When Nostalgia Forgets the Present
   When Nostalgia Forgets the Present When Nostalgia Forgets the Present
   Exploring your mind Exploring your mind
   Read it in Exploring your mind
   When Nostalgia Forgets the Present

   The movie “Midnight in Paris” by Woody Allen explains nostalgia as the
   negation of the present through the life of its main character.
     __________________________________________________________________

   The contents of Exploring Your Mind are for informational and
   educational purposes only. They don't replace the diagnosis, advice, or
   treatment of a professional. In the case of any doubt, it's best to
   consult a trusted specialist.

   Last update: 08 March, 2018
   Does the Soul Really Exist?
   Does the Soul Really Exist? Does the Soul Really Exist?
   Does the Soul Really Exist?
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Dangers of Overdiagnosis
   The Dangers of Overdiagnosis The Dangers of Overdiagnosis
   The Dangers of Overdiagnosis
     __________________________________________________________________

   The Real Danger of Internet Trolls
   The Real Danger of Internet Trolls The Real Danger of Internet Trolls
   The Real Danger of Internet Trolls
     __________________________________________________________________

   You and Your Partner Are Suffering From Depression. What Can You Do?
   You and Your Partner Are Suffering From Depression. What Can You Do?
   You and Your Partner Are Suffering From Depression. What Can You Do?
   You and Your Partner Are Suffering From Depression. What Can You Do?
     __________________________________________________________________

     * (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)
     __________________________________________________________________

   Interesting Articles
   The Dangers of Overdiagnosis
   The Dangers of Overdiagnosis The Dangers of Overdiagnosis
   Clinical PsychologyThe Dangers of Overdiagnosis
   Maladaptive Coping Styles According to Jeffrey Young
   Maladaptive Coping Styles According to Jeffrey Young Maladaptive Coping
   Styles According to Jeffrey Young
   TherapiesMaladaptive Coping Styles According to Jeffrey Young
   The Increasing Problem of Online Gambling
   The Increasing Problem of Online Gambling The Increasing Problem of
   Online Gambling
   Clinical PsychologyThe Increasing Problem of Online Gambling
   Domestic Violence Can Cause Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
   Domestic Violence Can Cause Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
   Domestic Violence Can Cause Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
   PsychologyDomestic Violence Can Cause Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
   (PTSD)
   The Link Between Dopamine and Schizophrenia
   The Link Between Dopamine and Schizophrenia The Link Between Dopamine
   and Schizophrenia
   Clinical PsychologyThe Link Between Dopamine and Schizophrenia
   Cognitive Distortions
   Cognitive Distortions Cognitive Distortions
   PsychologyCognitive Distortions
   Goleman's Emotional Intelligence Performance Model in the Workplace
   Goleman's Emotional Intelligence Performance Model in the Workplace
   Goleman's Emotional Intelligence Performance Model in the Workplace
   TheoriesGoleman's Emotional Intelligence Performance Model in the
   Workplace
   A Hostile Personality is Linked to Increased Cognitive Impairment
   A Hostile Personality is Linked to Increased Cognitive Impairment A
   Hostile Personality is Linked to Increased Cognitive Impairment
   Personality PsychologyA Hostile Personality is Linked to Increased
   Cognitive Impairment
   (BUTTON) Load more...
   Subscribe to our newsletter

   Select from the 0 categories from which you would like to receive
   articles.
   ____________________
   ____________________Enter a valid email
   (BUTTON) Subscribe now
   [ ] I accept the terms, conditions and the privacy policy.
   Exploring your mind Exploring your mind Exploring your mind
   Exploring your mind is also available in:
     * Português
     * Türkçe
     * Deutsch
     * 日本語
     * Italiano
     * Español
     * Suomi
     * Français
     * Polski
     * Dansk
     * Norsk bokmål
     * Svenska
     * Nederlands
     * 한국어

   Follow us
     *
     *
     __________________________________________________________________

   Other Sites
     * logo icon lmem logo icon lmem logo icon lmem
     * logo icon lmem logo icon lmem logo icon lmem
     * logo icon lmem logo icon lmem logo icon lmem
     * logo icon lmem logo icon lmem logo icon lmem
     * logo icon lmem logo icon lmem logo icon lmem
     __________________________________________________________________

   MContigo MContigo

   Exploring your mind Blog about psychology and philosophy. Articles and
   opinions on happiness, fear and other aspects of human psychology.
   © 2012 – 2022 . All rights reserved.
     __________________________________________________________________

     * Who we are
     * Privacy policy
     * Terms and conditions of use
     * Cookies law
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-29">
<text>
   (BUTTON) Skip to main content

   IFRAME:
   https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-TFKV632&amp;gtm_auth=NsJH3T
   s1-89I8lZURwQYmw&amp;gtm_preview=env-1&amp;gtm_cookies_win=x

   IFRAME:
   https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-N279F7B&amp;gtm_auth=jfKETt
   lWamfZ4l02YiFCQw&amp;gtm_preview=env-1&amp;gtm_cookies_win=x

     * (BUTTON) Download Article
       Download Article
          + Download PDF
          + ReadCube
          + EPUB
          + XML (NLM)
       (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)
       Share on
          +
          +
          +
       (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)
       Export citation
          + EndNote
          + Reference Manager
          + Simple TEXT file
          + BibTex
       (BUTTON)

     * total views
     *

   View Article Impact

SHARE ON

     *
     *
     *
     *
     *

Edited by

Atsushi Oshio

   Waseda University, Japan

Reviewed by

Anne Berthold

   ETH Zürich, Switzerland

Alin I. Gavreliuc

   West University of Timișoara, Romania

TABLE OF CONTENTS

     *
          + Abstract
          + Introduction
          + Study 1
          + Study 2
          + General Discussion
          + Limitations and Future Directions
          + Coda
          + Data Availability Statement
          + Ethics Statement
          + Author Contributions
          + Conflict of Interest
          + Acknowledgments
          + Footnotes
          + References

     * (BUTTON) Export citation
          + EndNote
          + Reference Manager
          + Simple TEXT file
          + BibTex

   Check for updates

People also looked at

ORIGINAL RESEARCH article

   Front. Psychol., 26 October 2020
   Sec. Personality and Social Psychology
   https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.570621

Nostalgia Proneness and the Collective Self

   [24] Georgios Abakoumkin^1 ^*, [24] Tim Wildschut^2 and
   [newprofile_default_profileimage_new.jpg] Constantine Sedikides^2
     * ^1Laboratory of Psychology, Department of Early Childhood
       Education, University of Thessaly, Volos, Greece
     * ^2Centre for Research on Self and Identity, School of Psychology,
       University of Southampton, Southampton, United Kingdom

   In two studies, we examined the association between nostalgia proneness
   (i.e., trait-level nostalgia) and importance of the collective self. In
   Study 1, we tested and supported the hypothesis that nostalgia
   proneness is positively correlated with relational collectivism, which
   entails an emphasis on one’s connections with close others and small
   social networks. In Study 2, we demonstrated that nostalgia proneness
   is also positively correlated with group collectivism, which emphasizes
   one’s membership in more abstract, larger social groups or categories,
   and was reflected in increased identification with a national ingroup.
   These findings offer insight into the nature of nostalgia proneness—a
   consequential and stable personality trait.

Introduction

   Nostalgia, “a sentimental longing … for the past” (Pearsall, 1998, p.
   1266), is an ambivalent, albeit predominantly positive, and social
   emotion (Hepper et al., 2012a; Sedikides and Wildschut, 2016; for
   historical overviews, see Batcho, 2013; De Diego and Ots, 2014). When
   people nostalgize, they feel connected with others in a way that
   enhances their perceptions of belongingness and acceptance (Sedikides
   et al., 2015, 2016; Abakoumkin et al., 2019). In nostalgic reverie,
   “the mind is ‘peopled’” (Hertz, 1990, p. 195). Mental representations
   of social bonds (e.g., family, friends, and partners) form the building
   blocks of nostalgic memories; important figures from one’s past are
   brought to life and become part of one’s present (Davis, 1979; Batcho,
   1998; Abeyta et al., 2015; Wildschut et al., 2018). As a result,
   nostalgia makes one feel loved, supported, and efficacious in social
   relations (Zhou et al., 2008; Wildschut et al., 2010). However, most of
   the research on the sociality function of nostalgia has been concerned
   with momentary or transient (i.e., state-level) nostalgia. In the
   present investigation, we focus on the role of trait-level nostalgia
   (i.e., nostalgia proneness; Sedikides et al., 2004; Wildschut and
   Sedikides, in press).

   The extant literature indicates that nostalgia proneness is positively
   related with various indices of sociality. High-nostalgia (compared to
   low-nostalgia) individuals value social inclusion. In an early study
   (Batcho, 1998), participants first completed the Nostalgia Inventory
   (NI; Batcho, 1995), which assesses nostalgia proneness across different
   aspects of everyday life. Specifically, participants rated how much
   they generally missed each of 20 items from when they were younger
   (e.g., “someone I loved,” “the way people were,” “my pets”). The
   average rating was used to classify participants as high nostalgia and
   low nostalgia by selecting the top and bottom 25% of the sample,
   respectively. Next, participants rated themselves on 10 aspects of
   personality, including the extent to which they preferred activities
   with people rather than alone. High-nostalgia (compared to
   low-nostalgia) participants reported a stronger preference to be with
   other people rather than alone.

   More recently, Juhl et al. (2020) showed the positive associations of
   nostalgia proneness with three core features of human sociality:
   empathy (Eisenberg and Strayer, 1987), attachment security (Mikulincer
   and Shaver, 2011), and prosocial or charitable behavior (Batson, 2011).
   Across five studies, nostalgia proneness was consistently associated
   with greater affective empathy (assessed with various measures; e.g.,
   “Seeing people cry upsets me”; Mehrabian and Epstein, 1972), including
   among young children. Moreover, the link between nostalgia proneness
   and affective empathy held when controlling for domain-level (Big Five)
   personality traits and did not vary significantly as a function of age
   or gender. Juhl et al. further showed that high-nostalgia (compared to
   low-nostalgia) individuals evinced greater attachment security
   (assessed with the Security subscale of the Attachment Style
   Questionnaire; e.g., “I trust other people and I like it when other
   people can rely on me”; Hofstra et al., 2005). Attachment security, in
   turn, mediated the relation between nostalgia proneness and empathy.
   High-nostalgia (compared to low-nostalgia) individuals were more likely
   even to donate money to charity when given the opportunity to do so,
   and this relation was mediated serially by attachment security and
   affective empathy.

   The distinctive sociality of nostalgia proneness is brought into sharp
   relief when nostalgia is contrasted with two other modes of thinking
   about one’s past: rumination (Rusting and Nolen-Hoeksema, 1998) and
   counterfactual thinking (Epstude and Roese, 2008). Cheung et al. (2018)
   examined how nostalgia, rumination, and counterfactual thinking are
   similar or different in terms of their relation with seven functions of
   autobiographical memory (i.e., usages of memory or motives to remember;
   Harris et al., 2014): intimacy maintenance (attaining symbolic
   proximity to close but absent others), teach/inform (transmitting
   insights about oneself or life), self-regard (carrying over effective
   problem-solving strategies to present action, clarifying one’s
   identity), bitterness revival (rekindling resentment for having been
   wronged by others), conversation (enlivening current social exchange),
   boredom reduction (counteracting tedium), and death preparation (coping
   with mortality awareness). The uniqueness of nostalgia proneness
   (compared to rumination and counterfactual thinking) resided in its
   comparatively strong positive association with intimacy maintenance and
   weak association with bitterness revival. Nostalgia-prone individuals,
   then, indicate that they use autobiographical memories to stay
   connected to loved ones and not to stir up bitterness toward others.

   In light of this cumulative evidence, we propose that nostalgia-prone
   individuals assign greater importance to the collective self. Whereas
   the individual self refers to those unique aspects of the self-concept
   that differentiate the person from others and distinguishes him or her
   within the social context, the collective self refers to those aspects
   of the self-concept that are shared with other members of the social
   groups to which one belongs and is based on social bonds to others
   (Sedikides and Brewer, 2001). Brewer and Chen (2007) distinguished
   between two forms of self-definition at the collective level, with
   distinct implications for psychological functioning. Relational
   collectivism refers to an emphasis on one’s bonds to close others and
   small social networks. Group collectivism denotes an emphasis on one’s
   membership in more abstract, larger social groups or categories. In
   Study 1, we tested the association of nostalgia proneness with
   relational collectivism (and individualism). In Study 2, we extended
   this line of inquiry by examining the link between nostalgia proneness
   and group collectivism, as reflected in (national) ingroup
   identification. Our overarching objective was to tighten the
   nomological net around nostalgia proneness and thereby better
   understand this consequential and stable personality trait (Wildschut
   and Sedikides, in press).

Study 1

   In Study 1, we used survey data available from the Longitudinal
   Internet Studies for the Social Sciences (LISS) panel. Participants
   completed measures of nostalgia proneness, individualism, and
   relational collectivism. The measures of individualism and collectivism
   incorporated a further, cross-cutting distinction between a horizontal
   and vertical orientation (Singelis et al., 1995; Triandis and Gelfand,
   1998). A horizontal orientation emphasizes similarities between oneself
   and others. Thus, horizontal individualism involves self-reliance
   without a desire to differentiate oneself by achieving high status, and
   horizontal collectivism emphasizes interdependence with others without
   submitting oneself to others. A vertical orientation emphasizes
   hierarchies and differences between oneself and others. Accordingly,
   vertical individualism involves distinguishing oneself through
   competition and status acquisition, and vertical collectivism involves
   subordinating and sacrificing oneself for the sake of one’s social
   relations. We hypothesized that nostalgia proneness would be positively
   related to both horizontal and vertical collectivism dimensions (but
   not to individualism dimensions).

Method

Data Collection

   The LISS panel^1 includes members of the Dutch general public selected
   based on a true probability sample of Dutch households. Panel members
   complete studies each month, and their responses can be combined across
   studies. Data collection is managed by CentERdata in Tilburg, The
   Netherlands. We assembled the dataset from three LISS studies.
   “Background Variables” (completed April 2011) contained demographic
   measures, “Nostalgia—part 1, wave 1” (completed November 2012)
   contained measures of nostalgia proneness, and “Self-Regulatory
   Orientation” (completed April 2011) contained measures of collectivism
   and individualism. Data for the “Background Variables” study are
   updated monthly, and we used the data collected in the same month as
   the “Self-Regulatory Orientation” study. The “Nostalgia” study assessed
   nostalgia proneness at six timepoints. We selected the timepoint (part
   1, wave 1) that was closest to the “Self-Regulatory Orientation” study.

Participants

   Eight hundred sixty-eight participants completed measures of nostalgia
   proneness, collectivism, and individualism, as well as demographic
   information (457 women, 411 men; M [age] = 52.13 years, SD [age] =
   16.40 years, Range[age] = 16–91 years).

Nostalgia Proneness

   Participants in the “Nostalgia—part 1, wave 1” LISS study completed the
   Southampton Nostalgia Scale (SNS; Barrett et al., 2010) and the NI
   (Batcho, 1995). For the SNS, they responded to seven items. Three of
   them measured the extent to which participants found nostalgia
   valuable, important, or significant (1 = not at all, 7 = very much),
   and four measured how frequently participants became nostalgic (1 =
   very rarely, 7 = very frequently). We averaged responses to create SNS
   scores (α = 0.94; M = 4.12, SD = 1.23). For the NI, participants
   indicated how nostalgic (1 = not at all, 6 = very much) they felt about
   20 objects (e.g., “someone I loved” and “my childhood toys”). We
   averaged responses to create NI scores (α = 0.93; M = 3.83, SD = 1.11).
   We used two measures of nostalgia proneness for the purpose of
   convergent validation (Campbell and Fiske, 1959; Wildschut and
   Sedikides, in press).

Individualism and Relational Collectivism

   Singelis et al. (1995) developed 32 items to assess horizontal
   collectivism, vertical collectivism, horizontal individualism, and
   vertical individualism (eight items for each dimension). Triandis and
   Gelfand (1998) subsequently adapted 27 of these items to assess the
   four dimensions. Participants in the “Self-Regulatory Orientation” LISS
   study completed 8 of these 27 items (2 items for each dimension). These
   eight items were selected on the basis of their high factor loadings,
   as reported by Triandis and Gelfand. Participants rated the items (1 =
   totally not applicable, 7 = totally applicable). We averaged responses
   to create indices of horizontal collectivism (“If an acquaintance gets
   a prize, I would feel proud,” “To me, pleasure is spending time with
   others”; α = 0.59; M = 4.77, SD = 1.25), vertical collectivism (“It is
   my duty to take care of my family, even when I have to sacrifice what I
   want,” “It is important to me that I respect the decisions made by my
   groups”; α = 0.63; M = 4.81, SD = 1.30), horizontal individualism (“I’d
   rather depend on my own strength than being dependent on others,” “My
   personal identity, independent of others, is very important to me”; α =
   0.70; M = 5.28, SD = 1.22), and vertical individualism (“Winning is
   everything,” “Competition is the law of nature”; α = 0.78; M = 3.36, SD
   = 1.39). The targets referred to in the collectivism items are not
   large social groups or categories, but specific interpersonal
   relationships or networks (e.g., family, friends, and acquaintances).
   Only one of the four collectivism items referred to groups (“It is
   important to me that I respect the decisions made by my groups”), and
   even this item alludes to relatively small social networks (i.e., “my
   groups”) rather than large collectives. For this reason, the present
   measures tap relational (as opposed to group) collectivism. We
   acknowledge that the reliability coefficients are lower than desired,
   particularly for horizontal collectivism and vertical collectivism.
   This is expected, given that each index comprised only two items. Low
   reliability attenuates effect size and, hence, reduces statistical
   power (Cohen, 1988). Fortunately, our sample size (N = 868) affords
   sufficient statistical power (>gt;0.80) to detect even a small effect (r =
   0.10, two-tailed).

Results and Discussion

   We present zero-order correlations among study variables in Table 1. As
   hypothesized, both measures of nostalgia proneness (SNS and NI) were
   significantly and positively correlated with both (relational)
   collectivism dimensions (horizontal collectivism and vertical
   collectivism). The nostalgia proneness measures were also positively
   correlated with both individualism dimensions, albeit less strongly
   than with the collectivism dimensions.
   TABLE 1
   www.frontiersin.org

   Table 1. Correlations among nostalgia proneness, collectivism,
   individualism, and demographics in Study 1.

   Consistent with prior findings (Singelis et al., 1995), the two
   horizontal dimensions (horizontal collectivism and horizontal
   individualism) and the two vertical dimensions (vertical collectivism
   and vertical individualism) were significantly and positively
   correlated. In addition, horizontal collectivism and vertical
   individualism were positively correlated, as were horizontal
   individualism and vertical collectivism. This overlap between the
   collectivism and individualism dimensions raises a legitimate question
   concerning their unique relations with nostalgia proneness. To address
   this, we first tested the partial correlation of each
   nostalgia-proneness measure with each collectivism dimension,
   controlling for the individualism dimensions. The positive associations
   between nostalgia-proneness measures and collectivism dimensions
   remained significant, when controlling for individualism dimensions. To
   be precise, the SNS was significantly correlated with horizontal
   collectivism (pr = 0.17, p <lt; 0.001) and vertical collectivism (pr =
   0.21, p <lt; 0.001), and the NI was also significantly correlated with
   horizontal collectivism (pr = 0.21, p <lt; 0.001) and vertical
   collectivism (pr = 0.24, p <lt; 0.001). Next, we tested the partial
   correlation of each nostalgia-proneness measure with each individualism
   dimension, controlling for the collectivism dimensions. The SNS was not
   significantly associated with horizontal individualism (pr = 0.01, p =
   0.751) or vertical individualism (pr = −0.02, p = 0.566), when
   controlling for collectivism dimensions. The NI was not significantly
   correlated with horizontal individualism (pr = −0.03, p = 0.470) or
   vertical individualism (pr = 0.04, p = 0.226) either.

   Finally, we examined correlations with demographic variables. Neither
   gender nor age was significantly correlated with either measure of
   nostalgia proneness. Women evinced significantly higher vertical
   collectivism scores and lower vertical individualism scores than men.
   Older (compared to younger) individuals scored significantly higher on
   vertical collectivism and horizontal individualism and lower on
   vertical individualism. When we controlled for age and gender (in
   partial-correlation analyses), the correlations of both nostalgia
   measures with both collectivism dimensions were practically identical.

   A key limitation of Study 1 concerns the exclusive focus on relational
   collectivism. This raises the question whether Study 1 findings can be
   replicated conceptually when collectivism is assessed in terms of one’s
   identification with more abstract, larger social entities. We tested
   this possibility in Study 2.

Study 2

   In Study 2, we examined the relation between nostalgia proneness and
   group collectivism. We assessed group collectivism in terms of
   participants’ identification with their national ingroup.

Method

Participants

   We tested 202 University of Thessaly students, who took part for extra
   course credit. We excluded four students because they were not Greek
   citizens, and six students because they did not complete all measures.
   The final sample comprised 192 individuals (188 women and 4 men),
   ranging in age from 18 to 40 years (M = 21.09, SD = 3.94).

Procedure and Materials

   Participants responded to the materials individually, on a computer. As
   in Study 1, we assessed nostalgia proneness with the SNS (Barrett et
   al., 2010; α = 0.91, M = 5.04, SD = 1.13) and NI (Batcho, 1995; α =
   0.87, M = 4.38, SD = 1.04). We assessed national identification with
   Leach et al. (2008) 14-item ingroup identification scale, which
   participants filled out in reference to their Greek nationality (1 =
   strongly disagree, 7 = strongly agree). The ingroup identification
   scale comprises two facets. (1) Group-level self-definition captures
   the degree to which individuals see themselves as similar to the
   ingroup prototype (i.e., self-stereotyping) and perceive ingroup
   members as similar to each other (i.e., in-group homogeneity). (2)
   Group-level self-investment encapsulates individuals’ positive feelings
   about their ingroup membership (i.e., satisfaction), the strength of
   their bond with the ingroup (i.e., solidarity), and the importance they
   ascribe to their ingroup memberships (i.e., centrality). We averaged
   across the relevant items to create indices of self-definition (e.g.,
   “I have a lot in common with the average Greek person”; α = 0.89, M =
   4.48, SD = 1.29) and self-investment (e.g., “I am glad to be Greek”; α
   = 0.89, M = 4.96, SD = 1.13).

Results and Discussion

   We present correlations between measured variables in Table 2. We did
   not include gender in the correlation matrix, because the sample
   included few men (n = 4). As hypothesized, both measures of nostalgia
   proneness were significantly and positively related to both group-level
   self-definition and group-level self-investment. Older participants
   scored lower on nostalgia (but age range was limited in this student
   sample). When we controlled for age (in partial correlation analyses),
   the correlations of SNS scores with self-definition (pr = 0.22, p =
   0.003) and self-investment (pr = 0.20, p = 0.007) remained significant,
   as did the correlations of NI scores with self-definition (pr = 0.16, p
   = 0.028) and self-investment (pr = 0.26, p <lt; 0.001).
   TABLE 2
   www.frontiersin.org

   Table 2. Correlations among nostalgia proneness, group-level
   self-definition, group-level investment, and age in Study 2.

   Study 1 revealed that nostalgia proneness is associated with higher
   relational collectivism. Study 2 conceptually replicated and extended
   this finding by demonstrating that nostalgia proneness is also linked
   with higher group collectivism, as reflected in the strength of ingroup
   identification.

General Discussion

Summary of Findings

   Extant evidence has tied nostalgia proneness to a stronger preference
   for engaging in activities with others (Batcho, 1998), increased
   empathy (Cheung et al., 2017a; Juhl et al., 2020; Newman et al., 2020),
   and greater emphasis on intimacy maintenance versus bitterness revival
   (Cheung et al., 2018). The present findings tighten further this
   nomological net around nostalgia proneness. Our point of departure was
   Brewer and Chen’s (2007) influential distinction between relational and
   group collectivism. Whereas relational collectivism involves
   self-definition in terms of one’s bonds to close others and small
   social networks, group collectivism denotes self-definition in terms of
   one’s membership in larger social groups or categories.

   In Study 1, we examined the association of nostalgia proneness with
   relational collectivism (and individualism). This study further
   included a cross-cutting distinction between horizontal (i.e.,
   emphasizing similarities between oneself and others) and vertical
   (i.e., emphasizing hierarchies and differences between oneself and
   others) orientations (Singelis et al., 1995; Triandis and Gelfand,
   1998). Zero-order and partial correlations (controlling for
   individualism) revealed that high-nostalgia (compared to low-nostalgia)
   individuals scored higher on measures of horizontal and vertical
   collectivism. Zero-order correlations between nostalgia proneness and
   the individualism measures were small and rendered non-significant when
   we controlled for collectivism (in partial-correlation analyses). Study
   2, in turn, demonstrated a link between nostalgia proneness and group
   collectivism, as reflected in two aspects of (national) ingroup
   identification: group level self-definition (i.e., the degree to which
   individuals see themselves as similar to the ingroup prototype and
   perceive ingroup members as similar to each other) and group level
   self-investment (i.e., the extent to which individuals value the
   ingroup and their membership in it). Across both studies, independent
   assessments of nostalgia proneness (SNS and NI) produced convergent
   support for the conclusion that high-nostalgia (compared to
   low-nostalgia) individuals are more likely both to emphasize the
   importance of maintaining tightly knit networks of interpersonal
   relationships, including the attendant rights and responsibilities
   (relational collectivism), and to value, identify with, and promote the
   collective welfare of more abstract, larger social groups (group
   collectivism). The magnitude of these relations (Study 1: r range =
   0.19 to 0.26; Study 2: r range = 0.17 to 0.27) is typical for social
   and personality psychology research (Gignac and Szodorai, 2016; Funder
   and Ozer, 2019).

Limitations and Future Directions

   Our studies were correlational and, hence, did not allow us to examine
   direction of causality. However, prior research is consistent with the
   possibility of a bi-directional relation between collectivism and
   nostalgia proneness. Collectivism entails a strong need to belong (Bond
   and Smith, 1996; Suh, 2007) and there is now strong evidence that
   experimentally induced belongingness deficits, which heighten the need
   to belong (Hackenbracht and Gasper, 2013), lead to increased nostalgia
   (Zhou et al., 2008; Wildschut et al., 2010; Seehusen et al., 2013;
   Abakoumkin et al., 2017). Thus, collectivism may cause nostalgic
   reverie. Nostalgia, in turn, serves a compensatory role, assuaging the
   need to belong by strengthening social connectedness (for a review, see
   Sedikides and Wildschut, 2019). By so doing, nostalgia can increase the
   importance and strength of relational and group bonds. For example,
   discussing a shared nostalgic (vs. ordinary) memory with a close other
   (i.e., partner, friend, or family member) increases relationship
   positivity, intimacy, support, and mutual disclosure (Hepper et al.,
   2012b). Likewise, reflecting on nostalgic (vs. ordinary) events shared
   with other members of one’s university or national ingroup increases
   positive ingroup evaluations, charitable intentions toward the ingroup,
   and personal sacrifice for the ingroup (Wildschut et al., 2014), as
   well as ingroup bias in the evaluation of domestic and foreign consumer
   products (Dimitriadou et al., 2019). These findings point to a causal
   path from nostalgia to relational and group collectivism, particularly
   when one’s nostalgia pertains to, or is shared within, the collective
   in question. Explicating the bi-directional causal paths between
   nostalgia and (relational as well as group) collectivism presents a
   fruitful direction for research.

   Another unresolved question is whether nostalgia proneness, through its
   positive association with group collectivism, is linked to increased
   prejudice and ethnocentrism. To understand the nuanced picture emerging
   from extant findings, two issues deserve careful consideration. First,
   it is important to distinguish between nostalgia for experiences from
   one’s personal past (i.e., the focus of our present studies) and
   nostalgia for the ostensibly glorious past of one’s group (e.g.,
   national nostalgia). Proneness to nostalgia for one’s personal past is
   negatively correlated with prejudice against outgroups (Smeekes, 2015;
   Cheung et al., 2017a), and recalling a personally nostalgic (compared
   to ordinary) experience with a specific outgroup member reduces
   prejudice toward the entire outgroup (Turner et al., 2012, 2013, 2018).
   By contrast, nostalgia for the past of one’s group (e.g., “How often do
   you long for the good old days of the country?”) has been linked with
   higher prejudice, national glorification, and anger toward outgroups
   (Smeekes, 2015; Smeekes et al., 2015, 2018; Cheung et al., 2017b;
   Baldwin et al., 2018). Yet, findings by Martinovic et al. (2017) raise
   a second issue that requires attention, pertaining to the referent of
   nostalgia. Their findings indicate that, under certain circumstances,
   nostalgia for the collective past is associated with improved outgroup
   attitudes. Participants from former Yugoslavia rated their nostalgia
   for the Yugoslavia of the past (e.g., “I get nostalgic when I think
   back to Yugoslavia in the past times”) and then indicated their level
   of contact with members from different ethnic subgroups from former
   Yugoslavia (Bosniaks, Serbs, and Croats). Nostalgia for the
   superordinate group, Yugoslavia, predicted increased contact between
   ethnic subgroups. Furthermore, political orientation might affect the
   referent of nostalgia. For example, political conservatives might be
   more prone than political liberals to nostalgize about the “good old
   days of a country” and thereby identify with this country. Clarifying
   the precise circumstances under which nostalgia proneness, in its
   different guises, is either positively or negatively associated with
   outgroup prejudice presents a challenge for future research.

Coda

   High-nostalgia (compared to low-nostalgia) individuals attach great
   value and significance to establishing, protecting, and enhancing
   close-knit interpersonal relationships, as well as to maintaining the
   integrity, and promoting the interests, of more abstract, larger groups
   and social categories. As history indicates, these pursuits can be the
   source of both great happiness and intense suffering. The present
   findings mark a step along the path to understanding these profound and
   sometimes contradictory implications of nostalgia proneness and human
   sociality.

Data Availability Statement

   The datasets presented in Study 1 can be found in online repositories.
   The names of the repository/repositories and accession number(s) can be
   found at: www.surveydata.nl/liss-panel-data-archive. The datasets
   presented in Study 2 are available on request to the corresponding
   author.

Ethics Statement

   Study 1, which involved human participants, was reviewed and approved
   by University of Southampton, School of Psychology ethics committee.
   The treatment of Study’s 2 human participants complies with APA ethical
   standards and with the University of Thessaly Code of Conduct. The
   patients/participants in both studies provided their written informed
   consent to participate in these studies.

Author Contributions

   GA, TW, and CS conceptualized the studies (theory, hypotheses, and
   design). TW conducted Study 1 and GA conducted Study 2. GA and TW wrote
   drafts of the manuscript. CS provided feedback and revised the drafts.
   All authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted
   version.

Conflict of Interest

   The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
   any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
   potential conflict of interest.

Acknowledgments

   We thank Maria Epitropou, Panayiota Metallidou, and Giannis Samaras for
   help with materials and equipment; Domna-Mika Kakana, Panagiotis
   Kanellopoulos, Angeliki Leondari, Kostas Magos, Yannis Pechtelidis, and
   Eleftheria Tseliou for facilitating access to participants; Maria
   Bakarou for assistance with data collection; and Panayiota Metallidou
   and Eleftheria Tseliou for helpful comments.

Footnotes

   1. www.surveydata.nl/liss-panel-data-archive

References

   Abakoumkin, G., Hepper, E. G., Wildschut, T., and Sedikides, C. (2019).
   From nostalgia through social connectedness to self-continuity:
   replication and extension. Hell. J. Psychol. 16, 127–144.

   Google Scholar

   Abakoumkin, G., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., and Bakarou, M. (2017).
   Nostalgia in response to group-based exclusion: the role of
   attachment-related avoidance. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 47, 373–381. doi:
   10.1002/ejsp.2235

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Abeyta, A., Routledge, C., Roylance, C., Wildschut, R. T., and
   Sedikides, C. (2015). Attachment-related avoidance and the social and
   agentic content of nostalgic memories. J. Soc. Pers. Relat. 32,
   406–413. doi: 10.1177/0265407514533770

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Baldwin, M., White, M. II, and Sullivan, D. (2018). Nostalgia for
   America’s past can buffer collective guilt. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 48,
   433–446. doi: 10.1002/ejsp.2348

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Barrett, F. S., Grimm, K. J., Robins, R. W., Wildschut, T., Sedikides,
   C., and Janata, P. (2010). Music-evoked nostalgia: affect, memory, and
   personality. Emotion 10, 390–403. doi: 10.1037/a0019006

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Batcho, K. I. (1995). Nostalgia: a psychological perspective. Percept.
   Mot. Skills 80, 131–143. doi: 10.2466/pms.1995.80.1.131

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Batcho, K. I. (1998). Personal nostalgia, world view, memory, and
   emotionality. Percept. Mot. Skills 87, 411–432. doi:
   10.2466/pms.1998.87.2.411

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Batcho, K. I. (2013). Nostalgia: the bittersweet history of a
   psychological concept. Hist. Psychol. 16, 165–176. doi:
   10.1037/a0032427

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Batson, C. D. (2011). Altruism in humans. New York, NY: Oxford
   University Press.

   Google Scholar

   Bond, R., and Smith, P. B. (1996). Culture and conformity: a
   meta-analysis of studies using Asch’s (1952b, 1956) line judgment task.
   Psychol. Bull. 119, 111–137. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.119.1.111

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Brewer, M. B., and Chen, Y. (2007). Where (who) are collectives in
   collectivism? Toward conceptual clarification of individualism and
   collectivism. Psychol. Rev. 114, 133–151. doi:
   10.1037/0033-295X.114.1.133

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Campbell, D. T., and Fiske, D. W. (1959). Convergent and discriminant
   validation by the multitrait-multimethod matrix. Psychol. Bull. 56,
   81–105. doi: 10.1037/h0046016

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Cheung, W. -Y., Sedikides, C., and Wildschut, T. (2017a). Nostalgia
   proneness and reduced prejudice. Personal. Individ. Differ. 109, 89–97.
   doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2016.12.045

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Cheung, W. -Y., Sedikides, C., Wildschut, T., Tausch, N., and Ayanian,
   A. H. (2017b). Collective nostalgia is associated with stronger
   outgroup-directed anger and participation in ingroup-favoring
   collective action. J. Soc. Polit. Psychol. 5, 301–319. doi:
   10.5964/jspp.v5i2.697

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Cheung, W. -Y., Wildschut, T., and Sedikides, C. (2018).
   Autobiographical memory functions of nostalgia in comparison to
   rumination: similarity and uniqueness. Memory 26, 229–237. doi:
   10.1080/09658211.2017.1346129

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral
   sciences. 2nd Edn. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

   Google Scholar

   Davis, F. (1979). Yearning for yesterday: A sociology of nostalgia. New
   York, NY: The Free Press.

   Google Scholar

   De Diego, F. F., and Ots, C. V. (2014). Nostalgia: a conceptual
   history. Hist. Psychiatry 25, 404–411. doi: 10.1177/0957154X14545290

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Dimitriadou, M., Maciejovsky, B., Wildschut, T., and Sedikides, C.
   (2019). Collective nostalgia and domestic country bias. J. Exp.
   Psychol. Appl. 25, 445–457. doi: 10.1037/xap0000209

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Eisenberg, N., and Strayer, J. (1987). Empathy and its development.
   Cambridge: University Press.

   Google Scholar

   Epstude, K., and Roese, N. J. (2008). The functional theory of
   counterfactual thinking. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Rev. 12, 168–192. doi:
   10.1177/1088868308316091

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Funder, D. C., and Ozer, D. J. (2019). Evaluating effect size in
   psychological research: sense and nonsense. Adv. Methods Pract.
   Psychol. Sci. 2, 156–168. doi: 10.1177/2515245919847202

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Gignac, G. E., and Szodorai, E. T. (2016). Effect size guidelines for
   individual differences researchers. Personal. Individ. Differ. 102,
   74–78. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2016.06.069

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Hackenbracht, J., and Gasper, K. (2013). I’m all ears: the need to
   belong motivates listening to emotional disclosure. J. Exp. Soc.
   Psychol. 49, 915–921. doi: 10.1016/j.jesp.2013.03.014

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Harris, C. B., Rasmussen, A. S., and Berntsen, D. (2014). The functions
   of autobiographical memory: an integrative approach. Memory 22,
   559–581. doi: 10.1080/09658211.2013.806555

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Hepper, E. G., Ritchie, T. D., Sedikides, C., and Wildschut, T.
   (2012a). Odyssey’s end: lay conceptions of nostalgia reflect its
   original Homeric meaning. Emotion 12, 102–119. doi: 10.1037/a0025167

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Hepper, E. G., Wildschut, T., and Sedikides, C. (2012b). “Down memory
   lane together: Nostalgic interactions in close relationships” in Poster
   presented at International Association of Relationship Research
   Conference; July 12-16, 2012; Chicago, IL.

   Google Scholar

   Hertz, D. G. (1990). Trauma and nostalgia: new aspects of the coping of
   aging holocaust survivors. Isr. J. Psychiatry Relat. Sci. 27, 189–198.

   PubMed Abstract | Google Scholar

   Hofstra, J., van Oudenhoven, J., and Buunk, B. P. (2005). Attachment
   styles and majority members’ attitudes towards adaptation strategies of
   immigrants. Int. J. Intercult. Relat. 29, 601–619. doi:
   10.1016/j.ijintrel.2005.05.009

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Juhl, J., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Diebel, T., Cheung, W. Y., and
   Vingerhoets, A. J. J. M. (2020). Nostalgia proneness and empathy:
   generality, underlying mechanism, and implications for prosocial
   behavior. J. Pers. 88, 485–500. doi: 10.1111/jopy.12505

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Leach, C. W., van Zomeren, M., Zebel, S., Vliek, M. L. W., Pennekamp,
   S. F., Doosje, B., et al. (2008). Group-level self-definition and
   self-investment: a hierarchical (multicomponent) model of ingroup
   identification. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 95, 144–165. doi:
   10.1037/0022-3514.95.1.144

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Martinovic, B., Jetten, J., Smeekes, A., and Verkuyten, M. (2017).
   Collective memory of a dissolved country: collective nostalgia and
   guilt assignment as predictors of interethnic relations between
   diaspora groups from former Yugoslavia. J. Soc. Polit. Psychol. 5,
   588–607. doi: 10.5964/jspp.v5i2.733

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Mehrabian, A., and Epstein, N. (1972). A measure of emotional empathy.
   J. Pers. 40, 525–543. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-6494.1972.tb00078.x

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Mikulincer, M., and Shaver, P. R. (2011). “Adult attachment and
   caregiving: individual differences in providing a safe haven and secure
   base to others” in Self-interest and beyond: Toward a new understanding
   of human caregiving. eds. S. L. Brown, R. M. Brown, and L. A. Penner
   (New York, NY: Oxford University Press), 39–52.

   Google Scholar

   Newman, D. B., Sachs, M. E., Stone, A. A., and Schwarz, N. (2020).
   Nostalgia and well-being in daily life: an ecological validity
   perspective. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 118, 325–347. doi:
   10.1037/pspp0000236

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Pearsall, J. (1998). The new Oxford dictionary of English. Oxford, UK:
   Oxford University Press.

   Google Scholar

   Rusting, C. L., and Nolen-Hoeksema, S. (1998). Regulating responses to
   anger: effects of rumination and distraction on angry mood. J. Pers.
   Soc. Psychol. 74, 790–803. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.74.3.790

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Sedikides, C., and Brewer, M. B. (2001). Individual self, relational
   self, collective self. Philadelphia, PA: Psychology Press.

   Google Scholar

   Sedikides, C., and Wildschut, T. (2016). “Nostalgia: a bittersweet
   emotion that confers psychological health benefits” in Wiley handbook
   of positive clinical psychology. eds. A. M. Wood and J. Johnson
   (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley), 25–36.

   Google Scholar

   Sedikides, C., and and Wildschut, T. (2019). The sociality of personal
   and collective nostalgia. Eur. Rev. Soc. Psychol. 30, 123–173. doi:
   10.1080/10463283.2019.1630098

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Sedikides, C., Wildschut, T., and Baden, D. (2004). “Nostalgia:
   conceptual issues and existential functions” in Handbook of
   experimental existential psychology. eds. J. Greenberg, S. Koole, and
   T. Pyszczynski (New York, NY: Guilford Press), 200–214.

   Google Scholar

   Sedikides, C., Wildschut, T., Cheung, W. -Y., Routledge, C., Hepper, E.
   G., Arndt, J., et al. (2016). Nostalgia fosters self-continuity:
   uncovering the mechanism (social connectedness) and the consequence
   (eudaimonic well-being). Emotion 16, 524–539. doi: 10.1037/emo0000136

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Sedikides, C., Wildschut, T., Routledge, C., Arndt, J., Hepper, E. G.,
   and Zhou, X. (2015). To nostalgize: mixing memory with affect and
   desire. Adv. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 51, 189–273. doi:
   10.1016/bs.aesp.2014.10.001

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Seehusen, J., Cordaro, F., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Routledge, C.,
   Blackhart, G. C., et al. (2013). Individual differences in nostalgia
   proneness: the integrating role of the need to belong. Personal.
   Individ. Differ. 55, 904–908. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2013.07.020

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Singelis, T. M., Triandis, H. C., Bhawuk, D., and Gelfand, M. J.
   (1995). Horizontal and vertical dimensions of individualism and
   collectivism: a theoretical and measurement refinement. Cross-Cult.
   Res. 29, 240–275. doi: 10.1177/106939719502900302

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Smeekes, A. (2015). National nostalgia: a group-based emotion that
   benefits the in-group but hampers intergroup relations. Int. J.
   Intercult. Relat. 49, 54–67. doi: 10.1016/j.ijintrel.2015.07.001

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Smeekes, A., Jetten, J., Verkuyten, M., Wohl, M. J. A.,
   Jasinskaja-Lahti, I., Ariyanto, A., et al. (2018). Regaining in-group
   continuity in times of anxiety about the group’s future: a study on the
   role of collective nostalgia across 27 countries. Soc. Psychol. 49,
   311–329. doi: 10.1027/1864-9335/a000350

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Smeekes, A., Verkuyten, M., and Martinovic, B. (2015). Longing for the
   country’s good old days: national nostalgia, autochthony beliefs, and
   opposition to Muslim expressive rights. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 54,
   561–580. doi: 10.1111/bjso.12097

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Suh, E. M. (2007). Downsides of an overly context-sensitive self:
   implications from the culture and subjective well-being research. J.
   Pers. 75, 1321–1342. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-6494.2007.00477.x

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Triandis, H. C., and Gelfand, M. (1998). Converging measurement of
   horizontal and vertical individualism and collectivism. J. Pers. Soc.
   Psychol. 74, 118–128. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.74.1.118

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Turner, R. N., Wildschut, T., and Sedikides, C. (2012). Dropping the
   weight stigma: nostalgia improves attitudes toward persons who are
   overweight. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 48, 130–137. doi:
   10.1016/j.jesp.2011.09.007

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Turner, R. N., Wildschut, T., and Sedikides, C. (2018). Fighting ageism
   through nostalgia. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 48, 196–208. doi:
   10.1002/ejsp.2317

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Turner, R. N., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., and Gheorghiou, M. (2013).
   Combating the mental health stigma with nostalgia. Eur. J. Soc.
   Psychol. 43, 413–422. doi: 10.1002/ejsp.1952

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Wildschut, T., Bruder, M., Robertson, S., van Tilburg, W. A. P., and
   Sedikides, C. (2014). Collective nostalgia: a group-level emotion that
   confers unique benefits on the group. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 107,
   844–863. doi: 10.1037/a0037760

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Wildschut, T., and Sedikides, C. (in press). “The measurement of
   nostalgia” in Handbook of positive psychology assessment. eds. W. Ruch,
   A. B. Bakker, L. Tay, and F. Gander (Göttingen: Hogrefe).

   Google Scholar

   Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., and Robertson, S. (2018). Sociality and
   intergenerational transfer of older adults’ nostalgia. Memory 26,
   1030–1041. doi: 10.1080/09658211.2018.1470645

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Routledge, C., Arndt, J., and Cordaro, F.
   (2010). Nostalgia as a repository of social connectedness: the role of
   attachment-related avoidance. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 98, 573–586. doi:
   10.1037/a0017597

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Zhou, X., Sedikides, C., Wildschut, T., and Gao, D. -G. (2008).
   Counteracting loneliness: on the restorative function of nostalgia.
   Psychol. Sci. 19, 1023–1029. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02194

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Keywords: nostalgia proneness, relational collectivism, group
   collectivism, ingroup identification, collective self

   Citation: Abakoumkin G, Wildschut T and Sedikides C (2020) Nostalgia
   Proneness and the Collective Self. Front. Psychol. 11:570621. doi:
   10.3389/fpsyg.2020.570621

   Received: 08 June 2020; Accepted: 28 September 2020;
   Published: 26 October 2020.

   Edited by:
   Atsushi Oshio, Waseda University, Japan

   Reviewed by:
   Alin I. Gavreliuc, West University of Timișoara, Romania
   Anne Berthold, University of Zurich, Switzerland

   Copyright © 2020 Abakoumkin, Wildschut and Sedikides. This is an
   open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
   Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in
   other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the
   copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in
   this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice.
   No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply
   with these terms.

   *Correspondence: Georgios Abakoumkin, gabak@uth.gr

This article is part of the Research Topic

   Current Issues in Nostalgia Research
   View all 13 Articles

People also looked at

   Download
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-31">
<text>
   #Subscribe to What's New / HowStuffWorks RSS

   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-NXHP8V

   1
   ____________________ (BUTTON) Submit Search
   Search Close Search

     * Health
     * Science
     * Home &amp; Garden
     * Auto
     * Tech
     * Culture
     * Money
     * Lifestyle
     * Entertainment
     * Adventure
     * Animals

     * Quizzes
     * Coupons

   ____________________ (BUTTON) Submit Search
   Sign up for our Newsletter!
   ​
   [hsw-avatar-sm.png]
   HowStuffWorks Newsletter
   [hsw-avatar-sm.png]
   [hsw-avatar-sm.png]
   [hsw-avatar-sm.png]
   [hsw-avatar-sm.png]

   ____________________
   ____________________ (BUTTON) Mobile Newsletter chat subscribe

   Health Science Home &amp; Garden Auto Tech Culture Money Lifestyle
   Entertainment Adventure Animals Quizzes Coupons
   (BUTTON) More
   Money Lifestyle Entertainment Adventure Animals Quizzes Coupons

   Prev NEXT

   Advertisement

   HowStuffWorks
   Science
   Life Science

   Inside the Mind

   The Human Brain

How Nostalgia Works

   Prev NEXT
   By: Julia Layton
     *
     *
     *
     *
     *
     *

Nostalgia and Your Brain

   Nostalgia runs high in transitional age ranges: the teens through 20s
   and over 50 (from &amp;quot;middle-aged&amp;quot; to &amp;quot;senior&amp;quot;). "
   Nostalgia runs high in transitional age ranges: the teens through 20s
   and over 50 (from &amp;quot;middle-aged&amp;quot; to &amp;quot;senior&amp;quot;). "
   Nostalgia runs high in transitional age ranges: the teens through 20s
   and over 50 (from "middle-aged" to "senior").
   Image Source/Getty Images

   External triggers for nostalgia are easy to recognize. Looking at old
   pictures, reminiscing about old times or meeting up with a long-lost
   friend will all get you to wistful longing.

   Less obvious, people seem prone to nostalgize when they're feeling cold
   [source: Zhou et al.]. We'll get back to that.

   Advertisement

   As far as sensory triggers go, music is powerful, and songs from
   adolescence and young adulthood are particularly so — a fact not lost
   on advertisers, who infuse commercials for everything from cars to
   yogurt with tracks that their target audiences grew up with [source:
   Elliot]. Experts theorize that music from this period of our lives is
   most strongly associated with emotional memories due to properties of
   the adolescent brain [source: Stern]. The neural activity activated by
   a song we like, which causes the release of "feel-good chemicals" like
   dopamine, is activated to a greater extent between the ages of 12 and
   22. That extra-intense reaction becomes associated with the events and
   emotions going on while the song plays. And the emotions going on while
   the song plays are extra-intense, too, a result of all those "raging
   hormones" at work in the brain [source: Stern].

   Not a lot is known about the brain's role in nostalgia, but it seems to
   involve connections between stored emotions and memories [source:
   Ostashevsy]. Researchers have connected music-triggered nostalgia with
   increased activity in the prefrontal cortex, which is activated when we
   retrieve autobiographical memories [source: Janata]. Tastes may induce
   nostalgia in part because the neural pathways carrying information from
   the taste buds ultimately lead in part to the limbic system [source:
   Murray]. Scent data lands there, too.

   The limbic system, which includes the hippocampus and amygdala, plays a
   role in the processing and storage of memories (hippocampus), emotions
   (amygdala) and the "emotional memories" that result when a memory is
   stored during a highly emotional state [sources: Ostashevsy, Phelps,
   Levit]. Scent seems to elicit a stronger sense of nostalgia, as well as
   a more positive and emotional episode, than other triggers [source:
   Reid]. Might be because the olfactory bulb, which processes smell data
   from the nose, is right in the limbic system. It has direct links with
   the amygdala and the hippocampus [source: NBC]. Scents hardly have to
   travel at all to reach our stored emotional memories.

   We typically think of nostalgia triggers along the lines of these types
   of sensory inputs. Yet one of the most common nostalgia triggers has no
   sensory component at all.

   1 2 3 4 5
   ​
   Cite This!

   Please copy/paste the following text to properly cite this
   HowStuffWorks.com article:

   (BUTTON) Copy
   Julia Layton "How Nostalgia Works" 3 June 2015.
   HowStuffWorks.com.
   <lt;https://science.howstuffworks.com/life/inside-the-mind/human-brain/nos
   talgia.htm>gt; 17 December 2022
   (BUTTON) Close
   Print | Citation
   Featured
   Special Offer on Antivirus Software From HowStuffWorks and TotalAV
   Security
   Special Offer on Antivirus Software From HowStuffWorks and TotalAV
   Security
   Try Our Crossword Puzzles!
   Try Our Crossword Puzzles!
   Can You Solve This Riddle?
   Can You Solve This Riddle?
   More Awesome Stuff
   []
   []

   Advertisement

   Advertisement

   Advertisement
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-32">
<text>
   #Harley Therapy™ Blog » Feed Harley Therapy™ Blog » Comments Feed
   Harley Therapy™ Blog » Nostalgia – is Missing the Past Good or Bad for
   You? Comments Feed alternate alternate alternate

   Book Therapy Here

Harley Therapy™ Blog

Harley Therapy™ Blog

   (BUTTON) Harley Therapy™ Blog
     * Therapy Services
     * Therapist Bios
     * About Us
     * Topics
          +
               o Addiction
                 Addiction
               o ADHD
                 ADHD &amp; Autism
               o Anger
                 Anger
               o Anxiety &amp; Stress
                 Anxiety &amp; Stress
               o Cognitive Therapy
                 Cognitive Therapy
          +
               o Common Problems
                 Common Problems
               o Grief &amp; Loss
                 Grief &amp; Loss
               o Depression
                 Depression
               o Eating Issues
                 Eating Issues
               o Going to Therapy
                 Going to Therapy
          +
               o Mindfulness
                 Mindfulness
               o Parenting
                 Parenting
               o Personality Disorders
                 Personality Disorders
               o Relationships
                 Relationships
               o Self Esteem
                 Self-Esteem
          +
               o Self-Help
                 Self-Help
               o Sexual Problems
                 Sexual Problems
               o Theory &amp; Training
                 Theory &amp; Training
               o Types Of Therapy
                 Types Of Therapy
               o Work Life
                 Work Life
     * ____________________
     * Find a Therapist

   Menu
   ____________________ (BUTTON)
   Find a Therapist

Nostalgia – is Missing the Past Good or Bad for You?

   Last reviewed by Dr. Sheri Jacobson Dr. Sheri Jacobson May 16, 2022
   Depression, Relationships
   nostalgia

   photo by Andrea Rico

   Often think about your past? Or wish you could go back in time and have
   the life you had? Or the world we all once had before the coronavirus
   pandemic? Nostalgia has direct implications on our mental health.

What is nostalgia?

     Nostalgia is a longing for our past, albeit a possibly romanticised
     version.

   We can be sentimental for people, experiences, places, and things, or
   even for a version of ourselves we once were.

   Nostalgia is different from homesickness, where we want to be in
   another existing space than the one we are in.

   And it’s not the same as fantasy, where we seek to substitute reality.
   With nostalgia, we know we are in the here and now. We are just
   indulging in a trip down memory lane, while wearing our ‘rose coloured
   glasses’.

When being nostalgic is a positive

   In the last century, researchers focussed on nostalgia as something
   negative. It was seen as an inability to accept the past or what we’ve
   lost, and something that stopped us from being in the present.

   But a flurry of more recent research now claims nostalgia as a mental
   health positive. The newer perspective on nostalgia is that it can help
   us feel:
     * more connected (we can remember good times with loved ones and feel
       cared for)
     * inspired to deal with the present (good things happened in the
       past, so trying to reach our goals means they might happen again)
     * like we have a stronger sense of self (we are a person connected to
       a past, who belongs).

     Researcher Krystine I. Batch, creator of the ’Nostalgia Inventory’,
     analysed memories of resistance fighters in WWII next to current
     empirical research on the subject. This highlighted how nostalgic
     memories counteracted loneliness, supported emotional and cognitive
     coping, strengthened social bonds and cultural identity, and even
     helped with accepting a new homeland.

Nostalgia’s dark side

   nostalgia So where does nostalgia go wrong? It’s now thought that there
   is more than one kind of nostalgia, and that not all kinds are helpful.

   Personal nostalgia is when we miss what we experienced in the past.
   It’s the type that leaves us connected and inspired to recreate such
   happy moments in the present and future.

     But we can miss things too soon. This is called ‘anticipatory
     nostalgia’. We miss and long for something before it’s even over,
     and it leads to sadness, worry, and anxiety.  An  American study
     released in 2020 shows that, as well as affecting our reaction,
     poorly timed nostalgia can also affect our ability to learn from our
     reminiscing.

   An example would be when we meet someone we really like, and we already
   feel sadness and a sense of longing when we think about when the
   relationship ends.

   Another 2020 study published in the Journal of Personality and Social
   Psychology concluded that nostalgia can also be negative if it’s random
   and unconscious.

     Consciously making an effort to recall the past was found to elevate
     our moods. But everyday moments of nostalgia were found to be more
     likely to have a negative effect.

Can’t stop reminiscing?

   Are you the type who has daily random nostalgia? Always comparing the
   present unfavourably to the past? Can’t enjoy it when good things
   happen because you are so worried about how much you’ll miss things
   when it’s all over?

   Research and theory aside, you have to look at how nostalgia is making
   you feel. Constantly being caught up in nostalgia that leaves you
   feeling low can be a sign of other issues.

When it’s a mental health issue

   There are unhealthy thought patterns that can be related to, or seem
   like, a form of nostalgia, but are actually signs of a mental health
   issue.

   Rumination sees you unable to stop repetitively focusing on things that
   distress you, and trying to figure out possible causes and consequences
   for them.

   Depression can mean we go over the past again and again, judging
   ourselves as unworthy and feeling consumed by guilt and self-hatred.

   Love and romance addiction can mean we think non stop about a person we
   met, or an ex, to the extent it affects our ability to cope. It can see
   us hiding things from family and friends.

   Anxiety means we constantly worry about the future in a way that makes
   us feel fearful, and becomes increasingly illogic. If anticipatory
   nostalgia has started to make you tense and panicky, it might have
   become anxiety.

   So lost in the past you can’t accept your current life? We connect you
   with highly experienced counsellors and psychotherapists in central
   London. Or use our booking site to find a UK-wide talk therapist as
   well as online therapists that you can work with from any country.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Have a question about nostalgia or want to share your own experience
   with being nostalgic? Use the comment box below.


   find a therapist

   Desktop - CTA Journalist Tablet - CTA Journalist Mobile - CTA
   Journalist

   close icon

   ASK US A QUESTION

   Dr. Sheri Jacobson

   ARE YOU A JOURNALIST WRITING ABOUT THIS TOPIC?

   If you are a journalist writing about this subject, do get in touch -
   we may be able to comment or provide a pull quote from a professional
   therapist.

   ________________________________________
   ________________________________________
   ________________________________________
   ________________________________________
   ________________________________________
   ________________________________________
   ________________________________________
   ________________________________________
   ________________________________________
   ________________________________________
   ________________________________________
   ________________________________________
   ________________________________________
   ________________________________________

   [ ] Yes, I am a journalist Click here to confirm you are a journalist

   IFRAME:
   https://www.google.com/recaptcha/api/fallback?k=6LctgfAUAAAAAJMiKqWL3gp
   6I45v2cfvL8Vp07hI


   		______________________________________
   ________________________________________
   ________________________________________

   [BUTTON Input] (not implemented)______ Submit

Related Posts

   Spending Christmas Alone This Year? How to Cope and Boost Your Mood
   Toxic Friends – Who They Are and What to Do Next
   Is Too Much Screen Time Really a Big Deal? (Read if You Are Depressed)
   Finally Met Someone, But Different Sex Drives?
   Leaving a Relationship – How Can You Keep It Sane?
   Choose Your Actions, Choose Your Mood – CBT Behavioral Interventions
   12 Responses to “Nostalgia – is Missing the Past Good or Bad for You?”
    1. Chris Longley
       I have always been quite a nostalgic person. During my life from
       adolescence to adult, being quite nostalgic about places or
       situations and seemingly even more nostalgic during unhappy times?
       Maybe that is because those places are linked to the happy times.
       I find myself re-visiting places of great happiness and joy and
       thinking back about the good times, drawing on those good feelings.
       But it can leave you feeling sad – of what is missing or lost now.
       As a child I would re-visit a place where I played with friends and
       had a happy or memorable time out of the mundane. Sometimes good
       things just happen with no expectations of it and you remember them
       more. Upon revisiting I was always left with a feeling of sadness
       for something that could not occur again or situation I want to be
       in now. I think it is comparison to the unhappiness verses the
       happiness of the here and now.
       Similar as an adult and often after a loss of something, revisiting
       somewhere of special memory or good feeling during a relationship
       or even a workplace event that was joyful. But I would go out of my
       way to reminisce there. Sometimes it can just be a piece of music
       or a smell to take me back to a moment in the past. “Baker Street”
       song takes me back to 1978 instantly. 2 stroke motorcycle exhaust
       fumes takes me back to the cafe in the harbour chatting up the
       young girl who worked there in 1982!
       It may sound foreboding but sometimes during really happy periods I
       think to myself, soak up these feelings of happiness, recollect the
       thoughts and sounds of the moment because nothing lasts forever and
       I know I will look back with nostalgia once it is all gone. Its
       like putting all in a bottle to open up at a later date. I suppose
       I`m acknowledging the happy situation I am in and that it can
       change but it is tinged with sadness knowing it will end.
       Nothing ever stays good does it.
    2. Harley Therapy
       Hi Chris. Maybe not – but on the other hand, nothing ever stays
       bad, really. Life is a flux over a static thing. It sounds like you
       have a romantic personality naturally. Some of us do. But we’d say
       that if your romantic thinking starts to stop you enjoying the
       present, then that could be rumination, an addiction to negative
       thinking. So worth keeping an eye on. Could be worth doing a round
       of CBT therapy, a short-term therapy which focuses exclusively on
       helping you control the link between your thoughts and your moods
       and doesn’t involve talking much about your past, just your current
       thinking. It would give you the tools to notice and manage when
       your thoughts are creative and romantic or when they are leading
       you towards low moods. It teaches tools of balanced thinking – how
       to get your thinking into a less black/white state. Best, HT.
    3. Andy
       I found myself being nostalgic and sentimental for family many of
       whom are long dead. I was doing genealogy at the time. I think this
       is a negative pass-time as it led me to become obsessed with the
       past and the people in it.
       I topped doing genealogy.
    4. Harley Therapy
       Andy, it’s good self awareness. If it made you unhappy, and you
       feel better now you’ve stopped, then seems you’ve made a choice for
       self care. Best, HT.
    5. Derek
       Is it possible that during addiction, you become more nostalgic? I
       was an addict, and ever since I’ve been clean, I’ve been anxious
       and I think that nostalgia has a lot to do with it(or at least some
       of it). I’ve been doing a lot of meditation including techniques
       for mindfulness, which helps tremendously. Honestly, I feel like a
       completely different person. I just wanted to get your thoughts on
       this.
    6. Harley Therapy
       Hi Derek, we aren’t quite sure we understand the question. Do you
       mean nostalgic for the time before you were an addict, or for the
       time when you were an addict? Nostalgia can be for any time of our
       life, as every period of life has positives and negatives. Nothing
       is either all good or all bad. When we are an addict the positives
       can be the camaraderie we have with other addicts, for example,
       that can feel like a family. There is nothing wrong with missing
       the good bits. that’s normal. But the thing that matters is not
       letting nostalgia blind us from remembering the hell addiction is
       as well. If it helps, keep a journal and write it all out. Perhaps
       write a list of all the positives you miss, but then all the
       negatives. And if you feel yourself faltering, don’t try to be
       brave, or think you are ‘such a different person’ you don’t need
       help. Reach out for support. It’s the strong thing to do, don’t let
       your head tell you otherwise….Best, HT.
    7. Diego
       Im trying to figure out how to deal with the “anticipaty nostalgia”
       im feeling right now. Every Olympics games I try to watch every
       sport cause I really enjoyed it, but sometimes I catch myself
       feeling sad when I see an athlete process from qualifications to
       final, and after the medals ceremony I get really sad cause it
       ended, also every time I feel sad for the Olympics to end before
       they are over. How can I deal with this, it’s really crazy. Thank
       you!
    8. Harley Therapy
       When we feel overly emotional over something outside of ourselves
       it’s often as we have a tendency to block emotions on a regular
       basis as we judge ourself and our emotions. So we find a venue
       where emotions are ‘acceptable’ and then let all our emotions out
       there. A classic example is someone who cries a ton when they watch
       a sad movie but are never emotional in real life. So we’d see this
       as an opportunity to process sadness, ask good questions, and take
       a deep dive into your own emotions. What is this sadness really
       about? Is it okay to just feel sad? Where in your life have you
       felt upset about something ending but then just hid your emotions?
       You get the idea. You might want to try journalling, we have an
       article on how to use journalling as self-help here
       http://bit.ly/journallingHT. Best, HT.
    9. Layla
       I am a teenager going to a different school that none of my friends
       are going to and I am just thinking back on the past when I was at
       school with everyone from the start of my child hood have been
       looking back at all my pictures from this year and just wishing I
       could hop back into the picture even with COVID I have been doing a
       lot of fun events and having one of the best school years of my
       life. It all went by to quickly and I just guess I’m not ready to
       let it go.
   10. Harley Therapy
       Hi Layla, we get it. Change can be really hard, particularly if we
       are leaving behind friends we love! So it’s very normal to feel
       nostalgic, worried, and anxious. But the one thing that is sure
       about life is that it can surprise us, and that each situation
       always has some positives, even if there are challenges. Life also
       tends to unroll in a way that we always have the inner resources
       for, even if we don’t yet realise it. Stay open to what good things
       might come or this new experience, trust that you will find a way
       to deal with it, and until then, know that what you are feeling is
       normal and you just have to take it one day at a time. If you get
       really anxious or upset though, do talk to someone you trust about
       your worries. Sometimes just talking things through can help us
       feel so much better. We wish you courage! Best, HT.
   11. MC
       I feel nostalgic all the time, so much so I think it may be an
       issue at times..? BUT… lets be perfectly honest here, modern life
       is awful…. we keep being told (propaganda) by all western media
       that everything nowadays is awsome, well the truth is it’s not. The
       internet is a great tool, yet has taken over the planet and
       seemingly everbodies lives, social media..?? say no more about the
       damage that does, music made on computers and having no human ‘feel
       or soul’ comedy is practically dead because whatever you say you
       will ‘offend’ somebody somewhere on the planet, can’t buy a house
       or flat (apartment) unless you are already wealthy, cant afford
       rent because of house prices, and property has become an
       ‘industry’…. I could go on and on and on.
       The past had many many issues, but on the flip side there are
       actually a few things that are better nowadays such as better
       understanding of mental health for arguments sake, but generally if
       you go back thirty years or more ago, life was much much eaiser in
       many respects, such as an average working man could buy somewhere
       to live, jobs were generally full time and permanent, there wasn’t
       so much pressure on people to be ‘perfect’ as there is now with the
       ‘self help’ industry. In saying all of this I can fully understand
       that anybody over say… 45yrs..? would look back with nostalgic eyes
       on how life used to be, although it obviously can effect how you
       live and potentially thrive in the present. The big problem is that
       the future just looks so grim, bleak, and depressing.
   12. Harley Therapy
       Thirty years ago we’d still have the cold war, before that,
       Vietnam, before that, World wars, before that…. you get the
       picture. At any given point in time at some place in the world some
       people are going through hardship, in another, people are doing
       okay. The world is a pretty balanced place in this way. Written as
       someone over 45, and many people do not look back to the past only,
       but are very focussed on the present and future. What we are seeing
       here, in all honesty, has nothing at all to do with the past or the
       future or anyone else. It has only to do with your thinking. Not
       you, your thinking. You are not your thoughts, believe it or not.
       What you are showing is strong signs of what are called ‘cognitive
       distortions’ http://bit.ly/cognitivedistortionlist. It basically
       means your mind is stuck in an addictive pattern of negative
       thinking that is like a rut you can’t get out of, that creates a
       parallel reality you believe is the ‘real truth’ when it’s far from
       it. Instead it keeps one in a limited perspective that blocks
       everything out. It’s guaranteed to lead right to depression and
       often loneliness. But you can get out of it, and change your
       thinking, in fact there is a short term form of therapy that
       focuses on just that called CBT. FYI, we have no interest in anyone
       being perfect. Being human is messy. We are all messy. And there is
       nothing wrong with that. We all of us have days we think the earth
       is the worst place to be, and that’s okay to. What isn’t so great
       is being so stuck in that mindset you can’t get out and it’s making
       you miserable. Often this comes from the ways we were raised, or
       childhood trauma, or from cognitive differences. It’s not our
       fault. It’s just that our brain is ‘stuck’. In that case, reaching
       out for support is a super idea, as these things can very much be
       helped and changed. Best, HT.

     * Find a Therapist
       Book Therapy Online
     * Top Posts
          + sexual abuse as a child
            Were you Sexually Abused as a Child? How to Tell
          + Shyness in adults
            Shyness in Adults – Is Being the Shy Type a Mental Health
            Issue?
          + A man and a woman sitting apart on a park bench both with
            their hands on their laps and boxes over their heads.
            Conflict in Relationships – 10 Tips to Manage and Reduce
            Fighting
          + how to respect
            How to Show Respect in Relationships – And Why You Might Have
            it Wrong
          + multitasking
            Multitasking – the Good, the Bad, and How to Make it Work
     * stressed or depressed?
     * LOOKING FOR SOMETHING? Search our hundreds of articles here, we
       love to help! ____________________ (BUTTON)
     *
   WANT TO FEEL BETTER, FAST? Join our community to receive new article
       alerts and your FREE "Wellbeing Guide and Workbook". First Name
       ____________________ Email Address ____________________ (BUTTON)
       Join Now!
     * Topics
          + Abuse &amp; Trauma
          + Addiction
          + ADHD &amp; Autism
          + Anger
          + Anxiety &amp; Stress
          + Cognitive Therapy
          + Common Problems
          + Counselling
          + Depression
          + Eating Issues
          + Going to Therapy
          + Grief &amp; Loss
          + Mindfulness
          + Parenting
          + Personality Disorders
          + Relationships
          + Self-Esteem
          + Self-Help
          + Sexual Problems
          + Theory &amp; Training
          + Types of Therapy
          + Work Life

About Harley Therapy

   Founded in 2006, we are an award-winning group connecting you to highly
   experienced therapists in our London rooms and online worldwide. Our
   mission is to improve emotional wellbeing through therapy and
   psycho-education. Content is produced by editor and lead writer Andrea
   Blundell, trained in person-centred counselling, and overseen by Dr
   Sheri Jacobson, retired BACP senior therapist &amp; host of TherapyLab.

   Dr. Sheri Jacobson Therapy Podcast Banner

Videos

   What is Psychotherapy?


   What to Expect in a Session?


   Intro to Harley Therapy

TherapyLab Podcast

   TherapyLAB

   A podcast dedicated to therapy, thought and the art of wellbeing!

   Host Dr Sheri speaks to distinguished guests about their childhoods,
   psychological health challenges and their experiences of therapy, good
   and bad.

   Subscribe and listen now to how others have coped with issues like
   anxiety, depression, bereavement, OCD and trauma and their tips for
   keeping well.

Book an Appointment

Call 0345 474 1724

   Book Online Now


Opening hours (BST)

   Monday – Friday 8am-8pm
   Saturday &amp; Sunday 9am-5pm

London locations

   Harley Street
   City of London
   London Bridge

   UK Wide

International

   Online sessions
   Find us on YouTube Find us on LinkedIn See us on Instagram Like us on
   Facebook Harley Therapy - Psychotherapy &amp; Counselling (@HarleyTherapy)
   on Twitter

   This blog is the project of Harley Therapy™ - Psychotherapy &amp;
   Counselling. We don't host ads to our UK readers or link to websites
   aside from reputable sources of information.
   See our website aims.
   Harley Therapy™ Blog Copyright © 2022. Website Terms Cookie emoji
   Cookies
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-33">
<text>
   IFRAME: https://gtm-server.healthline.com/ns.html?id=GTM-MB6365D

     * Health Conditions
          + Featured
               o Breast Cancer
               o IBD
               o Migraine
               o Multiple Sclerosis (MS)
               o Rheumatoid Arthritis
               o Type 2 Diabetes
               o Sponsored Topics
          + Articles
               o Acid Reflux
               o ADHD
               o Allergies
               o Alzheimer's &amp; Dementia
               o Bipolar Disorder
               o Cancer
               o Crohn's Disease
               o Chronic Pain
               o Cold &amp; Flu
               o COPD
               o Depression
               o Fibromyalgia
               o Heart Disease
               o High Cholesterol
               o HIV
               o Hypertension
               o IPF
               o Osteoarthritis
               o Psoriasis
               o Skin Disorders and Care
               o STDs
     * Discover
          + Wellness Topics
               o Nutrition
               o Fitness
               o Skin Care
               o Sexual Health
               o Women's Health
               o Mental Well-Being
               o Sleep
          + Original Series
               o Fresh Food Fast
               o Diagnosis Diaries
               o You’re Not Alone
               o Present Tense
          + Video Series
               o Youth in Focus
               o Healthy Harvest
               o No More Silence
               o Future of Health
     * Plan
          + Health Challenges
               o Mindful Eating
               o Sugar Savvy
               o Move Your Body
               o Gut Health
               o Mood Foods
               o Align Your Spine
          + Find Care
               o Primary Care
               o Mental Health
               o OB-GYN
               o Dermatologists
               o Neurologists
               o Cardiologists
               o Orthopedists
          + Lifestyle Quizzes
               o Weight Management
               o Am I Depressed? A Quiz for Teens
               o Are You a Workaholic?
               o How Well Do You Sleep?
          + Tools &amp; Resources
               o Health News
               o Find a Diet
               o Find Healthy Snacks
               o Drugs A-Z
               o Health A-Z
     * Connect
          + Find Your Bezzy Community
               o Breast Cancer
               o Inflammatory Bowel Disease
               o Psoriatic Arthritis
               o Migraine
               o Multiple Sclerosis
               o Psoriasis
          + Follow us on social media
     * Shop
          + Products by Condition
               o Insomnia
               o Stress Relief
               o Back Pain
               o Neck Pain
               o Sleep Apnea
               o Hot Sleepers
               o Allergies
               o Pain Relief
          + Product Reviews
               o Vitamins &amp; Supplements
               o Sleep
               o Mental Health
               o Nutrition
               o Gift Guides
               o CBD
               o Men’s Health
               o Women’s Health

   (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON) Health Conditions
     * (BUTTON) Discover
     * (BUTTON) Plan
     * (BUTTON) Connect
     * (BUTTON) Shop

   (BUTTON) Subscribe

Mental Well-Being

     * Life
     * Youth in Focus
     * Mind &amp; Body
     * Self-Care
     * Conditions
     * Therapy
     * Maternal Wellness
     * Parenting
     * Crisis Support

   (BUTTON)

Those Happy Golden Years: Coping with Memories That Bring More Pain Than
Peace

   Medically reviewed by Matthew Boland, PhD — By Crystal Raypole on July
   14, 2021
     * Nostalgia and depression
     * Benefits of nostalgia
     * How to cope
     * Finding support
     * Takeaway

   woman sitting with elbow on thigh looking at smartphone Share on
   PinterestJoscha Malburg/EyeEm/GettyImages

   Nostalgia refers to those wistful, sentimental feelings that surface
   when you recall significant experiences, relationships, places, and
   other bits of the past.

   Often, nostalgia inspires positive emotions — a sense of meaningfulness
   or life purpose, social connection, and optimism. But it can have a
   downside, too — a lingering aftertaste with an unpleasant bite.

   Longing for the past (something you can’t reclaim) can fuel
   dissatisfaction with the present. Nostalgic depression, then, can
   describe a yearning colored with deeper tones of hopelessness or
   despair.

   Experts don’t consider nostalgic depression a specific subtype of
   depression. All the same, fixating on rosy memories of happier times
   and better days can affect your mood and motivation to make the most of
   your life in the present.

Once upon a time

   Experts did consider nostalgia a mental health condition at one point.
   Physician Johannes Hofer first used the term in the late 1600s to
   describe the anxiety, homesickness, disordered eating, insomnia, and
   other symptoms experienced by Swiss mercenaries during their time
   fighting away from home.

   By the 1800s, nostalgia was considered more of a melancholic depression
   tinged with homesickness and loss.
   In the late 1900s, sociologist Fred Davis began to draw clear
   distinctions between nostalgia and homesickness. Others took his work
   further, highlighting nostalgia’s possible consequences and potential
   benefits.

   The link between nostalgia and depression

   A glimpse of a familiar face, the refrain of a long-forgotten song, a
   faint fragrance that pulls at your memory — any of these can inspire a
   deep and pervasive longing for people, places, and things that are no
   longer part of your life.

   You can’t always trust those glowing snapshots, though.

   You see, memory fragments are just that: fragments. As the flowing
   sands of time wear them down, you’re left with an incomplete picture of
   the past.

   The pieces that remain usually aren’t entirely accurate, either. Your
   brain has a tendency to apply Instagram-worthy filters to your
   memories, which can render them softer and more appealing than the
   actual event.

   Say you’re riding your bike along the river. A chorus of frogs
   harmonizes with the soothing rush of water, and the evening breeze
   cooling your face carries the scent of rain. These sensations provoke a
   wisp of memory: biking past a similar river on your way home from high
   school, with nothing to do except grab a snack and retreat to the
   privacy of your bedroom.

   “If only life were that simple now,” you think wistfully. “School and
   homework were so much easier than work and everything else I have to
   do.”

   What you might not remember:
     * regular conflicts with your parents
     * difficulties to keep your grades high enough to earn a scholarship
       to a college far from home
     * pain of your first heartbreak

   So, why does that matter? What’s wrong with remembering the good times?

   Often, nothing. Still, getting caught up in an idealized rewrite can
   leave you comparing your present day to a past you didn’t actually
   enjoy all that much.

   This yearning can eventually factor into emotional distress, including
   symptoms of depression.

Worry and rumination

   Nostalgia might cast a longer shadow if you have a habit of worrying or
   often find yourself fixating on dark and unwanted thoughts.

   A 2012 study explored potential negative effects of nostalgia in a
   sample of over 200 adults. The participants, most of whom were
   university students, answered questions about their:
     * mood, including if they experienced anxiety or depression
     * tendency to worry
     * nostalgic memories, which they were asked to describe using visual
       imagery and other sensory details

   According to the results, participants who tended to worry more often
   also reported stronger feelings of depression and anxiety after talking
   about their past.

Sadness or regret

   Looking back on the distant past can provoke symptoms of depression
   when you believe the present doesn’t measure up.

   If you failed to achieve things you hoped to accomplish, your bright
   enthusiasm for the future may have long since sputtered out. Maybe you
   wish you could return to your youth, when you envisioned life as a
   sprawling blank canvas to fill with your dreams.

   You might even feel guilt, as part of your depression symptoms, for
   letting loved ones (or yourself) down by making promises you couldn’t
   keep.

   Research from 2020 exploring the effects of nostalgia on well-being
   called nostalgia a “mixed emotion,” one that can have both positive and
   negative effects.

   Through several diary studies, researchers found evidence to suggest
   that nostalgia can sometimes create a cycle of distress:
     * You might notice spontaneous nostalgia as you go about your day,
       especially after unpleasant events, like a fight with your partner
       or a bad day at work.
     * As a result, you might focus even more on the past and fixate on
       negative thoughts. Eventually, you could begin to feel sad, even
       somewhat depressed.
     * This distress can, in turn, prompt further nostalgia.

   What’s more, existing feelings of depression or sadness can lay yet
   another filter over the past. In other words, if you tend to get
   nostalgic when you’re already feeling down, your memories might further
   darken your mood.

Loneliness and loss

   Nostalgia often surfaces when thinking of loved ones, both those you
   haven’t encountered in some time and those you no longer spend time
   with.

   If you lost a friend or loved one and feel like you never got real
   closure, this nostalgia may feel even more distressing.

   Anticipatory nostalgia, or a longing for someone or something you
   haven’t yet lost, can also trigger anxiety and preemptive sadness.

   You might notice this feeling during a romantic weekend with your
   partner or a casual day relaxing with your best friends. Despite
   enjoying yourself, you know every day can’t be the same and find
   yourself missing them well before they’re gone.

   The upside of nostalgia

   All that being said, nostalgia isn’t always negative. In fact, experts
   have associated it with several positive aspects of emotional
   well-being:
     * A stronger, more positive self-identity. Your life experiences help
       shape your personality and define your sense of self. Looking back
       on the past can help you realize how you’ve grown over time.
     * Life purpose. Thinking of important goals you have accomplished and
       important experiences can remind you that life has value and
       meaning — even if it didn’t turn out exactly how you predicted.
     * Belonging and connection. Nostalgia may sometimes contribute to
       feelings of loneliness, but 2020 research also suggested it can
       help you feel more connected to others. Thinking of the people you
       love, for example, can help you remember just how much you treasure
       those relationships.
     * Motivation and inspiration. Recalling “better” days could help
       motivate you to regain that contentment, inspiring you to work
       toward goals and improve circumstances you aren’t happy with.

   Nostalgia could even inspire you to get help for depression.

   In a 2020 study, researchers created two different announcements for
   the campus counseling center for 148 university students living with
   depression. One announcement was specifically designed to trigger
   feelings of nostalgia.

   The students who watched the nostalgic announcement reported
   experiencing more positive emotions afterward. They also showed more
   interest in reaching out to the counseling center to get support.

   Coping tips

   If looking back on the past leaves you feeling distressed in the
   future, these strategies can help.

Keep things in perspective

   You might recall happy moments with your friends and think, “I’ll never
   feel so close to anyone again.” Or, when thinking of an apartment you
   loved, you might think, “I’ll never live in such a nice place again.”

   Instead of letting the filtered past sway you, try probing your
   memories a little deeper for a more realistic picture.

   Yes, you and your friends did have a lot of fun — doing things you
   don’t have much interest in now. Plus, when you really consider your
   bond, you realize it wasn’t nearly as strong as the ones you have now.

   And, sure, that apartment was lovely, with great light and spacious
   rooms. Of course, you could hear every move your upstairs neighbors
   made, and your shower was almost never the right temperature (two
   problems you don’t have in your current apartment).

Mindfulness

   Taking time for mindfulness may benefit you when nostalgic thoughts
   provoke worry and rumination, drawing your mood into a downward spiral.

   Mindfulness, or consciously focusing your awareness on the here and
   now, can help you remember that any negative feelings coming up are
   just passing thoughts, and they have no power over your life now.

   You might recall your child’s first words and steps fondly, wishing you
   could still pick them up and cuddle with a bedtime story. When you find
   yourself mourning those long-ago moments, try reframing them. Instead,
   marvel at the fact that they can now read to you (and do so much more).

   Sitting with your memories, and any thoughts they bring up, can also
   help you find deeper meaning in the past.

   Instead of drawing comparisons between “now” and “then,” harnessing
   your nostalgia can help you cultivate gratitude for defining life
   events or people who truly changed your life.

   Working toward greater mindfulness? Give these tips a try.

Seek out fulfilling relationships

   When nostalgia leads to yearning for lost friends and loved ones, you
   can challenge feelings of loneliness by turning toward the important
   people in your present.

   New relationships might not replace the bonds that mattered so much.
   They can, however, remind you that you do have love and companionship,
   and that others value you, just as you value them.

   It’s also worth taking the chance to reach out to those people you miss
   most. Time changes nearly everyone, so you might find your friends,
   like you, have become entirely different people. Still, that doesn’t
   mean you can’t reconnect and perhaps even find something new to share.

   Seeking support

   A mental health professional might not diagnose nostalgic depression,
   but they can offer support when nostalgia leads to lingering emotional
   distress.

   Depression often affects your energy, not to mention your relationships
   with others. Connecting with a therapist is always a good idea when
   ruminating on thoughts of the past makes it difficult to thrive in the
   present.

   Some evidence suggests spontaneous nostalgia, or the recollections that
   come up in daily life, tends to have more of a negative impact than the
   nostalgic feelings that come up when someone asks you to recall a
   meaningful time in your life.

   Therapy can help when you notice:
     * anxiety or frequent worries
     * frequent rumination
     * guilt or shame
     * loss of motivation
     * persistent sadness, hopelessness, or despair
     * feelings of unworthiness or self-doubt

   A therapist can offer guidance by helping you:
     * recognize potential triggers for these feelings
     * create strategies to counter rumination
     * explore strategies to cope with nostalgia productively
     * identify symptoms of anxiety, depression, or other underlying
       mental health concerns

   Not sure where to start? Check out our guide to finding the right
   therapist.

   The bottom line

   Life only moves in one direction: forward.

   Nostalgic musings can give rise to lingering sadness that takes hold,
   creating a roadblock that grounds you in the past. But they can also
   serve as a compass, guiding you to the future you desire.
     __________________________________________________________________

   Crystal Raypole has previously worked as a writer and editor for
   GoodTherapy. Her fields of interest include Asian languages and
   literature, Japanese translation, cooking, natural sciences, sex
   positivity, and mental health. In particular, she’s committed to
   helping decrease stigma around mental health issues.

   Last medically reviewed on July 14, 2021

How we reviewed this article:

   (BUTTON)
   Sources
   (BUTTON)
   History
   Healthline has strict sourcing guidelines and relies on peer-reviewed
   studies, academic research institutions, and medical associations. We
   avoid using tertiary references. You can learn more about how we ensure
   our content is accurate and current by reading our editorial policy.
     * Abeyta AA, et al. (2020). Combating loneliness with nostalgia:
       Nostalgic feelings attenuate negative thoughts and motivations
       associated with loneliness.
       frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01219/full
     * Batcho K. (2019). Speaking of psychology: Does nostalgia have a
       psychological purpose?
       apa.org/research/action/speaking-of-psychology/nostalgia
     * Batcho KI. (2020). When nostalgia tilts to sad: Anticipatory and
       personal nostalgia.
       frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01186/full
     * Bridge DJ, et al. (2012). Neural correlates of reactivation and
       retrieval-induced distortion.
       jneurosci.org/content/32/35/12144
     * Newman DB, et al. (2020). Nostalgia and well-being in daily life:
       An ecological validity perspective.
       ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7513922
     * Hussain SA, et al. (2020). Effect of nostalgia as a motivational
       force for depressed students to seek professional psychological
       help.
       tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/07448481.2020.1754838?journalCode=v
       ach20
     * Oba K, et al. (2016). Memory and reward systems coproduce
       ʼnostalgicʼ experiences in the brain.
       ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4927028
     * Routledge C, et al. (2011). The past makes the present meaningful:
       Nostalgia as an existential resource.
       psycnet.apa.org/record/2011-15473-001
     * Routledge C, et al. (2013). Nostalgia as a resource for
       psychological health and well-being.
       psycnet.apa.org/record/2013-38800-004
     * Sedikides C, et al. (2008). Nostalgia: Past, present, and future.
       researchgate.net/publication/313213209_Nostalgia_past_present_and_f
       uture
     * Verplanken B. (2012). When bittersweet turns sour: Adverse effects
       of nostalgia on habitual worriers.
       psych.hanover.edu/Research/exponnetresults/Verplanken%20(2012).pdf
     * Wildschut T, et al. (2008). Nostalgia — From cowbells to the
       meaning of life.
       thepsychologist.bps.org.uk/volume-21/edition-1/nostalgia-cowbells-m
       eaning-life

   Our experts continually monitor the health and wellness space, and we
   update our articles when new information becomes available.

   Current Version

   Jul 15, 2021

   Edited By

   Kelly Morrell

   Medically Reviewed By

   Matthew Boland, PhD

   Copy Edited By

   Copy Editors

   Share this article
   Medically reviewed by Matthew Boland, PhD — By Crystal Raypole on July
   14, 2021

Read this next

     * Meditation Won’t Cure Your Depression, but It Can Be a Big Help
       Medically reviewed by Timothy J. Legg, PhD, PsyD
       Meditation won't cure depression overnight, but it can be more
       beneficial than you think.
       READ MORE
     *
     * Types of Depression and How to Recognize Them
       Medically reviewed by Karin Gepp, PsyD
       There are many types of depression. They share some symptoms but
       affect people differently. We’ll go over types of depression and
       how to recognize…
       READ MORE
     * Think Your Depression’s Getting Worse? Here’s How to Tell — and How
       to Get Support
       Medically reviewed by Alex Klein, PsyD
       Depression symptoms get worse for a variety of reasons. Find out
       what might be going on and what you can do to find relief.
       READ MORE
     * How to Hack Your Hormones for a Better Mood
       Medically reviewed by Vara Saripalli, Psy.D.
       Certain hormones may help you feel happier. We'll break down what
       they are and how to increase them naturally.
       READ MORE
     * 7 Physical Symptoms That Prove Depression Is Not Just ‘In Your
       Head’
       Medically reviewed by Timothy J. Legg, PhD, PsyD
       Depression hurts. And while we often pair this mental illness with
       emotional pain like sadness, crying, and feelings of hopelessness,
       research shows…
       READ MORE
     * Interactions Between Prozac and Alcohol
       Wondering if you can drink while taking Prozac? Find out how the
       drug interacts with alcohol and learn other helpful info about your
       medication.
       READ MORE
     * What to Know About Ketamine Therapy for Depression
       Medically reviewed by Nicole Washington, DO, MPH
       Ketamine offers a new, fast-acting approach to relieving
       treatment-resistant depression. Learn the research-backed benefits
       and how to try it.
       READ MORE
     * Unipolar Depression Explained — Plus Tips to Get Support
       Medically reviewed by Nicole Washington, DO, MPH
       Unipolar depression often refers to major depression, also called
       clinical depression. Learn the signs and how it compares to bipolar
       disorder.
       READ MORE
     * New Study Debunks Old Theory That Depressed People Are Just More
       Realistic
       New research raises doubts about a decades-old theory that
       depressed people are more realistic.
       READ MORE
     * Task Force Recommends Depression, Anxiety Screenings for Children
       A federal task force is recommending children between the ages of 8
       and 18 be screened for anxiety while children 12 to 18 be screened
       for depression
       READ MORE

     * About Us
     * Contact Us
     * Privacy Policy
     * Privacy Settings
     * Advertising Policy
     * Health Topics

     * Medical Affairs
     * Content Integrity
     * Newsletters
     * © 2005-2022 Healthline Media a Red Ventures Company. All rights
       reserved. Our website services, content, and products are for
       informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide
       medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional
       information.

   © 2005-2022 Healthline Media a Red Ventures Company. All rights
   reserved. Our website services, content, and products are for
   informational purposes only. Healthline Media does not provide medical
   advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information.
   AboutCareersAdvertise with us

   OUR BRANDS
   HealthlineMedical News TodayGreatistPsych Central
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-34">
<text>
   #alternate alternate alternate

   [EN]
   (BUTTON) ✕

Privacy &amp; Transparency

   We and our partners use cookies to Store and/or access information on a
   device.We and our partners use data for Personalised ads and content,
   ad and content measurement, audience insights and product
   development.An example of data being processed may be a unique
   identifier stored in a cookie. Some of our partners may process your
   data as a part of their legitimate business interest without asking for
   consent. To view the purposes they believe they have legitimate
   interest for, or to object to this data processing use the vendor list
   link below. The consent submitted will only be used for data processing
   originating from this website. If you would like to change your
   settings or withdraw consent at any time, the link to do so is in our
   privacy policy accessible from our home page.

   (BUTTON) Manage Settings (BUTTON) Continue with Recommended Cookies
   Vendor List|Privacy Policy

   Skip to Content

   (BUTTON) Search Magnifying Glass
   Search for: ____________________ Search
   (BUTTON) Close Search ×
   (BUTTON)

     * Categories
          + Community
          + Creativity
          + Inspiration
          + Leadership
          + Motivation
          + Self Improvement
          + Society
          + Social Impact
          + Storytelling
          + Writing
     * Articles
     * About

   brilliantio

Why Do I Keep Thinking About My Youth

   By: Author Valerie Forgeard

   Posted on April 7, 2022

   Categories Self Improvement, Memory, Mind, Motivation, Purpose,
   Thinking

   Many people remember the “good old days” with nostalgia, others with
   tears in their eyes because those childhood days were good or bad or so
   different from today’s world. We all have different opinions about
   everything, but one thing is for sure, we all go back down memory lane
   at some point!
   Memory Quotes Page 2

   Please enable JavaScript
   Memory Quotes Page 2
   Contents show
   1 What Can Bring You Back to Your Youth
   1.1 Sure, those photos can breathe life into you just when you need it,
   but can we really be inspired by others who didn’t even witness our
   personal experiences?
   2 Some Childhood Memories Can Be Happy, Others Can Be Painful
   3 It’s Normal to Have Memories or Thoughts of the Past
   4 Sometimes We Look for Answers
   5 Childhood Trauma That Needs Attention
   6 The Past Is a Real Thing
   6.1 The Past Doesn’t Just Disappear
   6.2 We Cannot Control How Our Lives Began but We Can Control Our
   Present and Our Future
   7 Nostalgia Is Helpful When It Leads Us to Be Grateful for What We’ve
   Achieved
   8 When You’re Feeling Down, It Can Often Help to Look Back on Fond
   Memories
   8.1 It Might Even Motivate You to Make Progress on Your Current Goals!
   9 Don’t Use Nostalgia to Run Away From Your Problems
   10 Childhood Memories Can Hold Important Information That Helps Us
   Navigate Our Lives Now
   10.1 It’s Also Common to Have Vivid Images From Our Childhood That May
   Not Be Pleasant
   11 Remembering the Past Is an Important Part of Overcoming Problems
   12 How remembering your youth can be usefulHow Remembering Your Youth
   Can Be Useful to Your Future
   13 Sometimes Our Memory Tricks Us
   13.1 We Have a Selective Memory
   14 How to Remember Parts of Your Youth That You’ve Forgotten
   15 What Thinking About Your Youth Can Do to You
   15.1 The Past Can Even Be a Good Thing if We Use It to Better
   Understand Our Present Selves
   16 Actions You Can Take From Remembering Your Youth
   17 Life Is a Journey
   17.1 My philosophy of life is that whatever happened before we’re not
   here to win or experience the good only, but to learn.
   18 Related Articles

What Can Bring You Back to Your Youth

   We all have moments in our lives that are important to us. No matter
   who we’re or what we do, we’ll always remember those moments. If you
   ever wonder where you’ve been or what you’ve done, all you’ve to do is
   go back and look at your photos.

   When we think about our past, we often have a few photos with us. These
   pictures may be from a specific time period in our lives or even from
   different decades. How you relate your old photos to your current life
   is entirely up to you; perhaps they’ll help take you back to the
   moment.

   I’ve seen many people post their old photos and memories on Facebook,
   but most of them are irrelevant to most people who don’t know them.
   Posting old photos is like writing a memoir and almost ensures that
   they’ll remain in history forever.

Sure, those photos can breathe life into you just when you need it, but can
we really be inspired by others who didn’t even witness our personal
experiences?

   And why do we catch ourselves in our everyday lives thinking:
     * Remember that time when…?
     * Is it because part of us wants to relive those memories or the
       moments or the emotion associated with them?
     * What do you think is the reason for this phenomenon?

Some Childhood Memories Can Be Happy, Others Can Be Painful

   Sometimes we have a specific memory that comes back to mind, or we
   think about the past in general. Most people experience this at some
   point in their lives and it doesn’t mean you’re having a breakdown or a
   sign of a mental illness from your past. Everyone experiences it!

   Unless you have been traumatized during your childhood, don’t worry
   because you think about the past.

   Here’s an example: If you remember positively how you played with your
   sister as a child, and then you see a sister with her child or
   something like that, it can trigger childhood memories.

   You shouldn’t worry too much if you feel good and bad at the same time
   when you think about the past. It doesn’t mean you’re broken or have
   mental health if you feel more than one emotion about something that
   happened to you when you were young.

   If you’re having a hard time living in the present when you think about
   the past, it’s called nostalgia-which means “deep longing or
   homesickness for the past”-and is generally perceived as a positive or
   negative emotion. Or perhaps even bittersweet?

   For many people, thinking about their past and reminiscing is normal.
   It’s normal for us to remember or reminisce about old times and events
   from our past.

It’s Normal to Have Memories or Thoughts of the Past

   Some memories are more vivid than others, but that doesn’t tell you if
   you’re dwelling on them too much or too little!

   Memories can also be triggered by different things – perhaps a song, an
   object like jewelry, a smell, or even just being in an area you spent a
   lot of time in as a child.

   In these cases, the triggers act like memories of the past, causing you
   to think of old times.

Sometimes We Look for Answers

   There are always some answers that our past can give us. For example:

   Perhaps you’ve repeatedly experienced bad things in your life and don’t
   understand why, because you weren’t a fearful child, nor have you
   experienced complex trauma.

   But deep inside you feel that the answers may be coming from an old
   emotion like fear or phobia that you’ve been avoiding dealing with for
   far too long. In this case, you may find answers by going back to the
   past, but for some reason, your mind keeps taking you back there
   looking for answers.

   Another reason could be that you feel social anxiety related to the
   fact that you were anxious as a child when you were with others and
   never figured out what triggered your anxiety symptoms.

Childhood Trauma That Needs Attention

   There are some traumatic memories where maybe you should have been
   treated before you became a young adult (e.g. adolescent psychiatry)
   but couldn’t because of the situations, which can affect your life
   today.

   If thinking about the past brings back some painful memories of
   difficult experiences that happened a long time ago, you may not have
   to worry if you have the coping skill to deal with it in a healthy way.
   But if we’ve had intense experiences, such as child abuse, emotional
   abuse, or other types of childhood trauma, and you feel symptoms of
   depression, panic attacks, anxiety disorder, PTSD (post-traumatic
   stress disorder), obsessive-compulsive disorder, or symptoms of mental
   health issues, you should seek medical advice.

The Past Is a Real Thing

   The past is a real thing that really happened. The future is an
   illusion that hasn’t happened yet. There’s no time travel, no time
   machines, and no way to travel back and change the past.

   No matter how much we want to change the past, there’s nothing we can
   do about it. The future may be an illusion, but the past is a fact. Our
   actions have consequences, positive and negative. They’re real and
   they’re a direct result of what we’ve done in the past.

   The present moment exists only because of everything that’s happened up
   to this point. Without the past, there would be no present moment, no
   real now. That’s why it’s so important to look at the past objectively,
   without trying to justify or rewrite history.

The Past Doesn’t Just Disappear

   The past doesn’t just disappear. It’s the foundation of who we’re. We
   can’t erase it, but we can go into the future knowing that we survived
   difficult times in the past and will survive again.

We Cannot Control How Our Lives Began but We Can Control Our Present and Our
Future

   You may have been too young to make a difference then, but you can
   decide how your life will end up, at least from where you’re now. We
   have a choice, and as long as we have a choice, there’s hope. It’s the
   way we choose to think about the past that gives it power over us and
   helps us progress in life.

Nostalgia Is Helpful When It Leads Us to Be Grateful for What We’ve Achieved

   Thinking about the past is natural and can be helpful.

   Looking back on good memories and seeing how far we’ve come since then
   can help us appreciate and value what we have now, while motivating us
   to make progress in the future.

   For example, it can be fun to reminisce about all the things you loved
   as a child, like your favorite show on TV or your favorite toy. It can
   be a valuable reminder that there are still many things to love today –
   if you just look for them more often.

   Nostalgia can hold us back just as easily as it can propel us forward.
   When we spend time thinking about the past instead of planning for the
   future, our goals can fall by the wayside.

   We may feel that our current life isn’t good enough because it’s
   nothing like the past, which is never a productive way to look at
   things. Or we may start comparing ourselves to others based on their
   past successes rather than their current ones – and suddenly feel
   envious or inadequate.

   By understanding how our past built us, we can improve our lives and
   our attitudes.

When You’re Feeling Down, It Can Often Help to Look Back on Fond Memories

   Nostalgia is a form of self-care – a reminder that the past had its
   good points, too, and that there’s still plenty to look forward to.

   Take some time to think about what you treasured most when you were
   young. What were your favorite toys or books? What were your
   relationships with friends and family like? What about elementary
   school and high school?

   Then use the opportunity to reflect on how far you’ve come since then –
   and how far you hope to go.

It Might Even Motivate You to Make Progress on Your Current Goals!

   Nostalgia can also be a form of escapism, as it distracts us from our
   current problems or helps us avoid them.

   Nostalgia can also be a form of escapism, as it distracts us from our
   current problems or serves to help us avoid them. For example, you
   might avoid dealing with your marital problems by reminiscing about the
   good times you’d during your relationship and intentionally ignoring
   the current relationship problems.

   Since nostalgia can be used as a distraction to avoid certain problems,
   it’s important that we don’t abuse it and instead use it in a
   productive way. To accomplish this, let’s look at some common ways we
   can abuse nostalgia and how you can tell if you’re using nostalgia as a
   distraction.

Don’t Use Nostalgia to Run Away From Your Problems

   When people have unresolved issues in their relationships, they often
   use nostalgia as an excuse to avoid dealing with those issues.

   The problem is that while they’re stuck in the past, they aren’t making
   progress in resolving their current problems. They use the past as an
   excuse not to work on their problems.

   Nostalgia isn’t about “all or nothing” – you don’t have to think back
   only to the good or bad times. Instead, think about the good and bad
   things that happened in your life, and don’t try to see something
   through rose-colored glasses.

   When we use nostalgia as a form of escapism and avoid seeing both the
   good and the bad from our past, it can cause us to avoid dealing with
   our current problems and get stuck in the past.

   For example:

   If you’re having problems with your partner, a friend, or a family
   member, but instead of working on those problems, you spend all your
   time thinking about the past ups and downs of your relationship, that’s
   one way nostalgia can be used as an escape mechanism.

   You’re trying to escape from something negative in your life by
   focusing on the positive aspects of something else. While this is
   natural, it’s unhealthy when you overuse nostalgia to escape from
   things. If you find yourself doing this, try to figure out why you feel
   the need to escape what’s happening.

Childhood Memories Can Hold Important Information That Helps Us Navigate Our
Lives Now

   Just like a baby, our early childhood memories become imprinted on our
   memory. It may be the first time you saw snow or the day your parents
   told you about Santa Claus. These impressions can trigger positive or
   negative emotions that can affect how you function now.

It’s Also Common to Have Vivid Images From Our Childhood That May Not Be
Pleasant

   You may remember having to go to high school and being teased by your
   classmates, or being sent away by your parents for singing an innocent
   song in class. For some people, such memories can make them feel shy
   and insecure, so they distance themselves from others and cling to
   their former selves to protect themselves.

   It’s actually a great thing to look back on your childhood and
   especially if you’ve memories or thoughts of the past. After all,
   childhood memories can hold important information that helps us
   navigate our lives now.

   By learning from and questioning your childhood memories, you can begin
   to put things in perspective. It’s important to spend time looking back
   at your childhood so you can find your place in this life. When you
   know where you came from, you know where you’re now and how to get
   where you want to go.

   Through the process of remembering, we can begin to understand who
   we’re and why we act the way we do today. Through our experiences, we
   learn about ourselves and can look at our lives from a different
   perspective, putting things in perspective.

   For example, if we had strict parents, they may have instilled in us a
   fear of making mistakes.

   We can learn a lot from our childhood.

   For example, if our parents were strict, they may have instilled in us
   the fear of making mistakes. This can make us fearful of making
   decisions and hesitant when it comes to taking risks or trying new
   things in life. We feel like we’re not good enough and don’t know what
   the right decision is, so we hold back. This can have a negative impact
   on our lives because we can’t reach our full potential and it keeps us
   from doing what we really want to do.

   Another example: If one parent was very protective of us as young
   children, they may have made us feel like they didn’t believe we could
   take care of ourselves. This can make it hard for us to gain confidence
   when we become young adults. We may rely too much on others and lack
   self-confidence, making it hard for us to believe in ourselves and our
   abilities.

   We may think that we’re not capable of handling things on our own or
   that we’ll break something or ruin everything if left to our own
   devices. This can be a problem because it keeps us from doing things
   for ourselves and becoming more independent.

   It’s not always easy to identify the things that are holding you back,
   but once you do, you can find solutions to them.

   We remember the past so that we can learn and grow.

Remembering the Past Is an Important Part of Overcoming Problems

   The first reason is that remembering and feeling are important to
   understanding and coping with problems. You may notice that you tend to
   close yourself off emotionally when you realize that you’re getting
   close to your feelings about a difficult situation. If this is the case
   for you, you should take some time to reflect on these feelings,
   because they can provide important clues about what’s going on in your
   life.

   The second reason nostalgic thoughts help us cope is that we can use
   our memories of the past to guide our actions in the future.

   The third reason nostalgia helps us deal with our problems is that it
   allows us to avoid dealing with those very problems. For example, if
   you spend all your free time thinking about the good old days when you
   were a young adult instead of working to solve a problem that’s
   bothering you today, then nostalgia may play an unfavorable role in
   managing your emotions and stressors.

How remembering your youth can be usefulHow Remembering Your Youth Can Be
Useful to Your Future

   The past doesn’t just disappear into a black void when it’s over, or
   become irrelevant because it’s not “the present.” So if the past is
   important for all these reasons, why do we pretend it’s no longer
   important? Because we have a relationship with the past that’s complex
   and confusing.

   We think that our memories are an incorruptible reflection of events,
   but in reality, they’re distorted by our emotions and the context – the
   time and place in which they occurred. It’s easy to wonder how these
   memories can be useful when they change depending on where you’re and
   how you feel; they morph like little piles of play dough.

   But maybe that’s okay. Maybe there isn’t one right answer to the
   question “What happened?” but a whole spectrum of possibilities,
   depending on who you ask and when you ask them.

   Maybe remembering isn’t so much about recalling exact details as it’s
   about putting things in perspective, learning from what happened,
   developing better coping strategies, making plans for the future based
   on your past experiences – and finding meaning in the process.

Sometimes Our Memory Tricks Us

   Cognitive distortions are common. We, humans, are a strange species for
   many reasons, one of which is the way we remember and deal with our
   past. We can be willing to forget parts and moments from our lives that
   don’t fit into the story we build about ourselves and others. This can
   lead to a disconnect between what’s actually happening at the moment
   and what we think it’s in our minds.

   Lovers of nostalgia can wander through their own time capsules,
   reliving their favorite moments from their youth and longing for the
   life they could’ve lived had they not failed (or not failed so often).
   It’s okay to romanticize your past: No one in the present will judge
   you for it; only you’ll know if it’s a healthy way to cope with
   everyday life, or if it’s an excuse used by people who’ve nothing
   better to do. Even plants nowadays have time capsules that they use as
   a source of food in times of scarcity, reliving their pre-apocalypse
   lives

We Have a Selective Memory

   It’s always fascinated me how our memory selects the best or worst
   moments of our lives. We can remember in detail an embarrassing moment
   in high school or a wonderful party, but we can’t remember what we ate
   yesterday. This isn’t a mistake; it’s just how our memory works.

   Memory helps us survive, so it focuses on unusual events that might
   affect us positively or negatively, such as meeting a new person or
   avoiding danger. The problem with this process is that some memories
   are false and inaccurate, especially the most intense or traumatic
   memories.

How to Remember Parts of Your Youth That You’ve Forgotten

   Here are some ways you can trigger memories of your youth:

   Pictures: Look at old photos – No matter how hard or bad you’d it as a
   kid, looking at photos will remind you that it could’ve been worse,
   because we often tend to be photographed when things are at least okay,
   and you can be grateful for some of the positive parts of your past
   that you don’t remember.
     * Music: listen to music from your childhood. You’ll be surprised how
       much it clears your head. I remember when I lived back in France
       after ten years abroad. The supermarkets still played the old music
       tracks that took me back to the old days, even though I was pretty
       sure they must’ve changed by now. And sometimes I couldn’t imagine
       them, but I could feel like a teenager again for a moment.
     * Ask a family member: maybe they can fill in the missing memories
       you’ve forgotten over time. And if not, it’s always good for you to
       catch up! Just make sure you ask those you trust. For example, it’s
       very common for an embittered divorced parent to try to manipulate
       his or her child’s memory over the years in hopes of changing his
       or her child’s memory. Most of us have witnessed this at least once
       in our network or through stories we hear from friends. If you find
       yourself in such a situation, just ask a neutral person about your
       youth. In some situations, some people opt for professional
       hypnosis to help them remember the missing pieces of their puzzle,
       especially for those who have repressed memory.
     * Eat something you enjoyed as a child. When I was a kid, food played
       an important role in my life. I’m not talking about expensive
       restaurants or Michelin-starred chefs – we didn’t have that kind of
       money – but simple, home-cooked food or cake or hot chocolate meant
       the world to me and still does. Food can bring back a lot of
       memories. For example, when I make French crepes, it reminds me of
       beautiful moments in my childhood,
     * Take a meditation retreat. A meditation retreat can be an option if
       you want to remember old events and learn to clear your mind.
       Meditation can be a useful tool if you’re trying to retrieve
       forgotten memories of past events, friendships, and even
       relationships.
     * Write down everything you remember about your youth. We’re not
       suggesting that we keep a journal of our younger years, but writing
       can still refresh some of the memories we keep in the back of our
       minds until we need them again… which happens to be right now!

What Thinking About Your Youth Can Do to You

   Have you ever wondered why, despite your best efforts, you keep
   thinking about the past? If this sounds familiar, I can tell you why:
   because the past is alive in so many ways.

The Past Can Even Be a Good Thing if We Use It to Better Understand Our
Present Selves

   When we learn to look at the past in a healthy way, we have the
   opportunity to learn how to deal with difficult feelings and complex
   relationships. A strong sense of self can help us see how we’ve grown
   and the life we’ve built, but also where we still need to grow in areas
   like communication or problem-solving.

   More importantly, looking at our past experiences can help us see how
   they shaped us and prepare us for potential future challenges.

   Looking at our formative years from an adult perspective gives us the
   opportunity to learn from our mistakes (or poor decisions) and
   celebrate successes that prepared us for other areas of life – whether
   professional or personal.

Actions You Can Take From Remembering Your Youth

   As you reflect on your youth, you may feel the need to take action.

   For example, if you’re feeling particularly nostalgic for a particular
   friend or place from when you were a young person, contacting that
   friend or organizing a trip to your hometown might be just the thing to
   rekindle the feelings of your youth.

   Other activities might be more spontaneous or even risky. You may feel
   compelled to flee your current life and start over somewhere else. This
   might mean quitting your job and moving across the country, or being
   more adventurous in your daily life. Whatever you do, just make sure
   it’s not an escape from the responsibilities and stability (and maybe
   boredom) that adult life brings.

Life Is a Journey

   When I look back, I see that my life has been full of ups and downs
   since elementary school! When we look back on our childhood, most of us
   probably feel some degree of happy nostalgia and painful memories –
   memories of past childhood activities, friendships, or toys may put a
   smile on our face. Many people look back on their teenage years or the
   first few years after leaving home as the best days of their lives.

   For me, nostalgia is like time travel, and I enjoy the good times and
   the bad times like watching a movie.

My philosophy of life is that whatever happened before we’re not here to win
or experience the good only, but to learn.

   We can learn from both positive and negative memories, and every step
   in our learning process is a big win, much bigger than you might think!

Related Articles

   American Psychological Association – Speaking of Psychology: Does
   nostalgia have a psychological purpose?

   American Psychological Association – Memories of Childhood Abuse

   Child Mind Institute – What is obsessive-compulsive disorder?

   By Author Valerie Forgeard

   Posted on April 7, 2022

   Categories Self Improvement, Memory, Mind, Motivation, Purpose,
   Thinking
   Ezoic report this ad

Post navigation

   Describing Breathing in Creative Writing

   Naming Fictional Places
   Ezoic report this ad

Latest Posts

     * 100 Argumentative Essay Prompts
     * 125 Screenwriting Prompts to Help You Write Your Next Script
     * 25 Easter Bunny Writing Prompts for Kids
     * 13 Spooky Halloween Story Ideas to Terrify Your Readers
     * 10 Creative Pumpkin Writing Prompts for Kids

   Ezoic report this ad

     * Privacy Policy
     * Terms and Conditions
     * Cookie Policy

     * Affiliate Disclaimer
     * Copyright Notice
     * Help Center

     * Resources
     * Newsletter
     * Contact

   Copyright © 2020-2022 Brilliantio Ltd

   x
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-35">
<text>
    #Manipal The Talk Network » Feed Manipal The Talk Network » Comments
   Feed Manipal The Talk Network » The Neurology of Nostalgia—Why Do We
   Long for the Past? Comments Feed alternate alternate

   Skip to content

   Search

   Search for: ____________________ Search

   Manipal The Talk Network

   Manipal’s largest student media organisation, run by a bunch of
   passionate folks across town. #WeAreManipal

   (BUTTON) Menu
     * Who we are
          + Executive Board – MIT
          + Executive Board – HS
          + Managing Board – MIT
          + Managing Board – HS
     * Manipal
          + Fests
          + Events
          + Clubs
          + In and Around Manipal
          + Senior’s Guide
          + Fresher’s Guide
          + The Manipal Directory
          + Videos
     * Creative
          + Stories
          + Poetry
          + Creative extras
     * Articles
          + Current Affairs
               o Cognizant Citizen
               o Other
          + Informative
               o General
               o Interviews
          + Rights
               o LGBT+
               o Women’s Rights
          + Miscellaneous
     * Contact Us
     * Fresher’s Guide

   Open Search

The Neurology of Nostalgia—Why Do We Long for the Past?


   You close your eyes. Suddenly, you’re in 6th grade again — it’s the
   first week of school. You’re walking through the corridors of your
   school, eating mom’s hand-made food that magically tastes yummy even
   when it’s cold, and watching your classmates playing hopscotch. You
   remember how you would wait for time to fly by so you could run home,
   only to go back to playing with your friends on the streets outside.
   When it was dinner time, you’d hear mom calling for you to go back
   home. At almost bedtime, you’d suddenly remember you had to wrap your
   notebooks in brown-paper cover. You’d plead mom to help you do it. And
   then off you went, to bed, feeling excited for the next fun day at
   school.


   Nostalgia is defined as “a feeling of pleasure and also slight sadness
   when you think about things that happened in the past”, by the
   Cambridge Dictionary. The term nostalgia encompasses that bittersweet
   feeling of recollecting fond memories of the past. From flipping
   through photo albums to scrolling through your photo gallery, from
   rereading the Harry Potter series to Enid Blyton books, or listening to
   a song from the 2000s that manages to take you back in time — we have
   countless ways of reminiscing. The mere lingering thought of the good
   ol’ days can easily feel like a warm, fuzzy hug pulling you closer the
   more you think about it.


   Derived from the Greek words “nostos” (meaning homecoming) and “algos”
   (meaning pain/ache), nostalgia used to have negative associations
   historically and was often thought of as a disease. However, the
   meaning of the word has metamorphosed over the years. Present-day
   research portrays an entirely different story that has unraveled behind
   the scenes, through experiments and studies. These studies have found
   that nostalgia can enrich resilience and happiness amongst humans.
   Further, the more nostalgia that is experienced, the more optimistic a
   person is likely to become.


Nostalgia in Neurology: Your brain rewards you and is proud of you!

   Experiencing nostalgia cannot be limited by viewing it as solely a
   feeling. Although nostalgia is defined appropriately, it is often used
   loosely — ignoring the implications it has on the human mind and brain
   function.

   Have you ever felt like listening to a song takes you back to some
   visual and cosy memory that makes you smile? Or perhaps a whiff of some
   flower that takes you back to your grandmother’s garden? Some factors
   like smell, music or scenery can trigger nostalgia in us. The trigger
   of nostalgia is usually an environmental factor such as a conversation
   with a childhood friend, or a certain significant date. However, it may
   also involve instinctive remembrance of the past.

   Every time nostalgia is experienced, a part of the brain is activated.
   The performance and activity of the brain’s reward systems and memory
   system are altered through stimulation. This includes the hippocampus —
   responsible for long-term memory and factual details of episodic
   memories, as well as the brain’s reward system, consisting of the
   substantia nigra, the ventral tegmental area, and ventral striatum.


   When the reward systems in the brain are triggered, a chemical known as
   Dopamine is released. Researchers have led experiments using Magnetic
   Resonance Imaging (MRI) scans to reveal that when nostalgia is felt,
   there is a close link between the release of dopamine and memories in
   the hippocampus. The dopamine deposits itself directly in the
   hippocampus, thereby activating the dopamine system in the hippocampus.
   This results in a significant improvement in the ability to remember
   specific memories and details. This justifies how when humans reward
   themselves at a particular time, they are able to remember that
   specific memory and information reasonably better. For example, if you
   scored an A+ on an exam and took your friends out as a treat, you’re
   more likely to remember the memory even years later, versus if there
   was no tangible reward involved.


   In this sense, nostalgia itself can be considered to be a type of
   reward since it allows us to relive memories of the past. This also
   explains how when you think about specific memories or details
   frequently over time, your ability to recall it is drastically
   enhanced.


   Thus, in our constant stride towards the future, recalling and reliving
   happy memories from the past and creating the feeling of nostalgia, as
   a result, can lead to boosted levels of happiness, and reduced stress
   levels.


Nostalgia Marketing: Your Fond Memories of the Past—Offer Valid Till Stocks
Last!

   Over the years, the powerhouses of the world — politicians, marketers
   and large organizations — have taken to nostalgia as a trick under
   their sleeves. Since nostalgia brings back strong emotion, it is easily
   used as an appeal, ploying the common person to create connections.


   “Doodh si safedi, Nirma se aayi, Rangeen kapda bhi khil khil jaaye.”
   Sound familiar?


   Washing Powder Nirma, Parle-G biscuits, Frooti — these are just some of
   several Indian brands that established themselves years ago and took to
   nostalgia marketing decades later. The reason they are able to do
   brilliantly in the market even today is because their brand recall
   value is immensely powerful. Their products are purchased and
   advertisements watched because viewers are able to feel an emotional
   connect and nostalgia of their childhood days.


   An often-used proverb, old is gold, is particularly relevant here.
   Nostalgia marketing taps into emotions and connectedness, taking people
   for a trip down memory lane. A marketers’ target audience is likely to
   remain loyal if they can connect to the brand. Nostalgia marketing
   allows brands to acknowledge the present without letting go of the
   past. Consumers today are able to re-experience the past through
   advertisements, jingles and campaigns. This results in a strong
   instinct to hold on tight to memories of the past as the uncertainties
   of the future grow more complex.


   People are also particularly nostalgic around festivals and occasions.
   Brands are able to capitalise on this through the release of
   advertisements that strike the right chord, picking up on what stings
   the most. For example, Cadbury chocolates’ emotional advertisements
   during the Indian festive season every year. As viewers feel connected
   to the advertisement, it translates into a connection with the brand.

Cultural Implications of Nostalgia


     Nostalgia is like a grammar lesson: you find the present tense, but
     the past perfect!

     – Owens Lee Pomeroy


   A Professor of Sociology and Personality Psychology,  Constantine
   Sedikides, describes Nostalgia as the “perfect internal politician,
   connecting the past with the present, pointing optimistically to the
   future.” Nostalgia has the power to bring a group of people closer and
   allows a person to establish a better connection with themselves.


   Through the knowledge of its impact and a deeper dive into how
   nostalgia works — the benefit of nostalgia can be applied to personal
   lives. Nostalgia can be a harbinger of a sense of calm and joy.
   However, treading carefully on this front is a must, because it doesn’t
   take much for nostalgia to become a cycle of negativity. “Those were
   simpler times, can’t we just go back to those days?” are especially
   common thoughts when recalling childhood memories. Instead of trying to
   turn back in time, researchers recommend that the focus must remain on
   today’s position while recognizing how you were able to bridge the gap
   between where you are today and where you were years ago. This can also
   be a signal of growth and positive change. It is also important to
   acknowledge how the moments that cause nostalgia today have augmented
   life over the years.

Childhood and the Nostalgic effect on Decisions

   As said before, nostalgia arises from memories, and typically it starts
   when we become young adults. So usually nostalgia is shaped a lot by
   childhood memories— a time when there were almost no responsibilities
   and when our thoughts and vision of the world were a lot simpler. It
   often revolves around idolising this era, and therefore there’s an
   unconscious attempt to recreate the instances similar to those
   seemingly perfect memories. We try reaching for things or people that
   symbolise the past. For example, a person might fondly remember a
   family recipe from their childhood. It becomes associated with
   happiness and cosiness, and hence they slowly grow attached to that
   specific dish. It can translate to more significant life decisions as
   well, where our preferences of surroundings and people are based on our
   past. If a person had an experience of living in a spacious home with
   gardens, shifting to an apartment may seem unpreferable compared to a
   separate home.

Culture and religion

   Each person is born into different cultures and religions and how their
   parents followed their culture directly affects the person. We have a
   nostalgic urge to follow what our parents did, or rather what we were
   most exposed to in our years of growth. Strong religious beliefs,
   superstitions, colourism or racism are some examples of cultural and
   social elements we are exposed to as a child. Even when we realise what
   is right or wrong and consciously abstain from wrong thoughts,
   somewhere deep inside there exist subtle biases. This is probably why
   many people feel uncomfortable and shocked by certain things people in
   other countries might do. While for the other people it might be
   natural, for this person brought up in another culture, whose nostalgic
   urge is trying to find elements from his own culture, it would seem
   very different. It can become so strongly embedded in their thoughts
   that even when many people might criticize them on their beliefs, they
   would refuse to think otherwise.

Nostalgia and Dreams

   Dreams and memories have a rather interesting connection. It has been
   found that during our sleep, our brain processes our memories, while
   simultaneously dreaming. This happens most often in the REM stage of
   sleep, where the person has the tendency to have vivid dreams. Our most
   significant and emotional memories affect the nature of our dreams.
   Hence a dream can actually create contact between us and people we
   haven’t met for a long time. It can show us places from far away
   memories and thus trigger nostalgia in us. It can let us interact with
   our past memories or fond experiences and be a great source of comfort
   to us. Sometimes we might even feel very strong emotions and the dream
   may seem so real that they are more impactful than real-life emotions.

Nostalgia as Therapy

   Nostalgia may be a bittersweet state of mind, but when looked at
   deeply, its positive aspects outweigh the negative. After all, it’s a
   filtered recollection of our memories. It is there to trigger
   positivity in people. It can make lonely people feel less so and give
   them hopes about their future. It cuts through boredom and gives us
   something to take comfort in. Our past memories, though altered, make
   us feel more human and closer to people around us. It can rekindle
   relationships and strengthen bonds in newly formed ones. When we feel
   hopeless, nostalgia can remind us that there’s scope for making good
   memories in future and helps us to push through the tough times.

   For people who feel detached from their past selves, nostalgia is a
   great tool to create a sense of self-continuity and remind them of the
   factors that haven’t changed in our personalities. Many people might
   feel that their lives have been for nought, that there were no
   contributions from their side. Nostalgia can make them realise the
   value of human interactions and every other beautiful memory they
   created in the past.

   So take all the time to recount your funniest memories with your
   childhood friends, or journal your favourite memories. Walk yourself
   through scenarios from the past — you playing in your childhood home,
   visiting your high school, going back to your favourite vacation spot.
   Decorate your room with framed photos and polaroids, throw birthday
   parties like you’re turning 6 again. Play music (the Ketchup song) on
   repeat and groove with the beats. The present moment can become a haven
   of happiness when it’s woven with the fondest memories from the past.

   Written by Anushka Bhattacharyya and Sanam Lulla for MTTN

   Edited by Avaneesh Jai Damaraju for MTTN

   Featured Image Courtesy: Wikimedia Commons

Published by MTTN CREW

   View all posts by MTTN CREW
   October 6, 2020

   General, Informative

   dreams, neurology, Nostalgia

Post navigation

   The Mumbai Mob: Fall of the City of Dreams
   The Hathras Incident — What it says about Indian Society

Leave a Reply Cancel reply

   You must be logged in to post a comment.

   Proudly powered by WordPress | Theme: Baskerville 2 by Anders Noren.

   Up ↑
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-37">
<text>
   #RSS Feed

   Home
   About
   Work With Me
   Contact
   Book Notes
   Best Articles
   Newsletter
   Free Ebook

Alex J. Hughes

   Home
   About
   Work With Me
   Contact
   Book Notes
   Best Articles
   Newsletter
   Free Ebook
   Nostalgia: A Beautiful Suffering
   September 27, 2014
   Culture
   Alex Hughes
   Nostalgia: A Beautiful Suffering

   Alex Hughes
   September 27, 2014
   Culture

Nostalgia: A Beautiful Suffering

   Alex Hughes
   September 27, 2014
   Culture

   Nostalgia can be many things. It’s the feeling of the first spring day
   when the sun starts to warm your bones after a long winter, reminding
   you of the endless possibilities of the impending summer. Nostalgia is
   the song you set to repeat and belted out with the windows down on your
   first road trip, free from your parents. It’s also the song that was
   the soundtrack to an early heartbreak, whose lyrics rang truer than
   even your own words. Nostalgia is passing a stranger who wears the same
   fragrance as an old love, casting you back into a storm of unfiltered
   emotion you thought you’d overcome. Much like it’s also the music that
   repaints a perfect picture of the sunlight catching her eyes in a
   moment where your entire world was completely calm.

   The common definition of nostalgia is a variation of: “A sentimental
   longing or wistful affection for the past, typically for a period or
   place with happy personal associations.” However, this doesn’t quite do
   the concept justice. It’s better described as an emotional
   connectedness to part of your younger self. This connection is
   rekindled, often without warning, by sensory experiences of the
   surrounding world, unlocking the floodgates to past emotions.
   Many view nostalgia as a crippling inertia that should be avoided at
   all costs. It is incredibly powerful and if given the opportunity, has
   the potential to stop you dead in your tracks. However, in small doses
   there’s a certain beauty to it. It can ignite moments of reflection,
   inspiration, and reconnect us to both our younger self and others.
   Creative minds seem more prone to nostalgia because we have a tendency
   to romanticize the past - not just the good, but the bad, heartbreak
   and all. We don’t necessarily long for that situation, but rather the
   raw emotion. Moments of nostalgia take us back to memories of the
   extremes, heartbreak and bliss, often the best reminders that we’re
   alive. We certainly prefer the highs, but the lows are just as much a
   part of life. One without the other leaves us without context or
   perspective. We can make decisions that allow us to achieve a certain
   level of equilibrium, but this leaves much to be desired. At times we
   need to feel the rise and fall of the waves.
   Regardless of the sentiment attached, nostalgia leaves us with a
   strange feeling somewhere between pleasure and the sharp sting of pain.
   It’s bittersweet. We ache to reconnect with our younger self, which can
   be for a handful of reasons. The one consistency in these moments is a
   desire to feel.
   If there were such a thing as a purest form of nostalgia, it would be
   those connections that lead back to childhood. Most of us associate
   memories of our childhood with innocence and joy. Times before we knew
   deception, brokenness, or the weight of responsibility. Nostalgia
   linked to childhood reveals that we were fortunate enough to have one.
   It shows gratitude and affection for that period of life.
   As we grow older, we insist on further complicating our lives. The
   realization that we can’t turn back the pages and achieve this level of
   naivety is what hurts. These moments are reminders of how important
   childhood is and that we should do our best to afford future
   generations the same privilege.
   Nostalgia that leads back to past relationships is similar in the sense
   that it reconnects us with a younger, more naïve version of ourselves,
   but can be much different in the range of emotions recalled. This
   covers the entire spectrum: anger, peace, resentment, forgiveness,
   happiness, sorrow, and everything in between. We can find pleasure in
   all these as they relate to love felt, love lost, or the realization
   that we’ve grown since. There’s a certain satisfaction in realizing
   lessons, once we’re far enough removed to look back.
   The happiness we find in nostalgia that leads to memories of love needs
   little explanation, as it’s one of our most basic desires. Love lost,
   on the other hand, is the most intriguing as to how we can possibly be
   nostalgic for these moments. Most of us don’t regularly desire to feel
   wrecked. However, sadness and despair are such powerful emotions, that
   it truly makes us feel. It can bring slight gratification because it’s
   a reminder of what it’s like to feel something so deeply, proving both
   our delicateness and resilience.
   Nostalgia can stir up any memory under the sun, not just childhood or
   relationships. It connects us back to achievements, adventures,
   experiences, friendships, and places; the list is inexhaustible. The
   triggers for these connections are even more diverse and unique to each
   of us. The only universal truth to nostalgia is its unusual blend
   between happiness and melancholy. However, a desire to turn back time
   and live briefly in that moment isn’t an inherently bad thing. It
   allows us to revisit a small part of our past and consider what makes
   us the person we are today.
   Moments of nostalgia also offer a powerful tool for creative minds. To
   create something influential that touches the lives of others, you need
   to establish an emotional connection in some way. Sometimes it demands
   that you dig deep and embrace nostalgia to revive the emotion
   surrounding a situation. If you’re able to peel back the layers and
   explore why a certain experience has such a strong connection, you
   might be able to recreate that for others. Briefly immersing yourself
   allows you to create honestly and potentially strike a chord with
   someone facing a similar situation or emotion. Moments of nostalgia can
   offer clarity, a forgotten perspective, or help us connect with those
   around us.
   Unfortunately, we can drown in nostalgia, dwelling long enough that it
   begins to interfere with the present. Nostalgia can come without
   warning and with a full head of steam, but it cannot be allowed to
   consume us for extended periods of time. The present must always be
   valued more than the past. The past is an important teacher and should
   never be completely forgotten, but lasting happiness is found in the
   moment. It’s in the things we’ve done today and the finer details all
   around us: the colors, emotions, scents, and sounds. The power that
   nostalgia carries should help inform our present decisions and
   observations.
   Nostalgia should be embraced like an old friend who stops by on
   occasion but never sticks around too long. It’s a gift that offers a
   window back to our younger self, the real emotions we felt, and what
   makes us the person we are today. Be cautious, but appreciate these
   moments. They can be harnessed for good and inspiration.
   Quite simply, nostalgia is a beautiful suffering.

   Tagged: Nostalgia, Nostalgic, Perspective

   Newer PostChasing Adventure: A Forgotten Perspective
   Older PostBook Review: 100 Sideways Miles

ajh.

   Back to Top
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-39">
<text>
   #Medium alternate

   ____________________

   a Few Words
   Published in

   a Few Words

   Adriana Azor
   Adriana Azor
   (BUTTON) Follow

   Apr 19, 2020
   ·
   3 min read
   ·
   (BUTTON)

   Member-only
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)

Why Are Happy Memories so Sad and Melancholic?

When nostalgia puts your heart on edge…

   Photo by Isaque Pereira from Pexels

   “This picture was taken 7 years ago. I miss your long hair, and our
   afternoons at your parents’ mountain house.”

   My boyfriend went digging into our picture archives. He’s always been
   so neat and tidy with electronic files. I was never able to appreciate
   them. I like printed books, developed…

   --

   --
   (BUTTON)

   3
   (BUTTON)

More from a Few Words

   A few words can change lives.
   Read more from a Few Words

Recommended from Medium

   Tara Lyn Mallick

   Tara Lyn Mallick

   What It Feels Like To Have ADHD
   Stephanie Schulz

   Stephanie Schulz

   Rosario Calvo — a chat about alternative medicine, happiness and
   delicious food
   Laras

   Laras

   in

   The Pink

   How Do We Feel About Pilots Going to Therapy?
   Maria Angelova, CEO of Rebellious Intl.

   Maria Angelova, CEO of Rebellious Intl.

   in

   Authority Magazine

   Self-Care &amp; Mental Wellness: Erika Beeson of Pivoting Your Potential On
   The Top Five Selfcare…
   SodaKite

   SodaKite

   Doomscrolling Is Ruining Your Mental Health
   Julie Borden

   Julie Borden

   in

   The Shortform

   The Royal Road to the Unconscious?
   Kyle Mapley

   Kyle Mapley

   in

   ILLUMINATION

   Your Trauma is the Opportunity of a Lifetime
   profisee

   profisee

   Does person-centred counselling fully meet the needs of clients
   struggling with alcohol problems?

   AboutHelpTermsPrivacy
     __________________________________________________________________

Get the Medium app

   A button that says 'Download on the App Store', and if clicked it will
   lead you to the iOS App store
   A button that says 'Get it on, Google Play', and if clicked it will
   lead you to the Google Play store
   Get unlimited access
   Adriana Azor

Adriana Azor

   2.2K Followers

   Neuroscience PhD | Exposing the secrets of the human brain | At the
   intersection of Creativity &amp; Science ❤ | Founder of BePeers.com |
   Editor of BrainChronicles
   (BUTTON) Follow
   (BUTTON)

   Help

   Status

   Writers

   Blog

   Careers

   Privacy

   Terms

   About

   Text to speech
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-3">
<text>
   #alternate Edit this page Wikipedia (en)

Nostalgia

   From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
   Jump to navigation Jump to search
   Feeling sentimentality for the past
   For other uses, see Nostalgia (disambiguation).
   The archives director for The Saturday Evening Post said that the
   magazine has been regarded with "a mixture of nostalgia and
   affection".^[1] Shown: a Norman Rockwell cover from August 1924.
   Part of a series on
                  Emotions
   Plutchik-wheel.svg Plutchik Dyads.svg
     * Affect
     * Classification
     * In animals
     * Emotional intelligence
     * Mood
     *
       Regulation
          + Interpersonal
          + Dysregulation
     *
       Valence

   Emotions
     * Acceptance
     * Admiration
     * Affection
     * Amusement
     * Anger
     * Angst
     * Anguish
     * Annoyance
     * Anticipation
     * Anxiety
     * Apathy
     * Arousal
     * Awe
     * Boredom
     * Confidence
     * Confusion
     * Contempt
     * Contentment
     * Courage
     * Curiosity
     * Depression
     * Desire
     * Disappointment
     * Disgust
     * Distrust
     * Doubt
     * Ecstasy
     * Elevation
     * Embarrassment
     * Empathy
     * Enthusiasm
     * Envy
     * Euphoria
     * Faith
     * Fear
     * Frustration
     * Gratification
     * Gratitude
     * Greed
     * Grief
     * Guilt
     * Happiness
     * Hatred
     * Hope
     * Horror
     * Hostility
     * Humiliation
     * Interest
     * Jealousy
     * Joy
     * Kindness
     * Loneliness
     * Love
     * Lust
     * Nostalgia
     * Outrage
     * Panic
     * Passion
     * Pity
     * Pleasure
     * Pride
     * Rage
     * Regret
     * Rejection
     * Relief
     * Remorse
     * Resentment
     * Sadness
     * Saudade
     * Schadenfreude
     * Self-pity
     * Shame
     * Shock
     * Shyness
     * Social connection
     * Sorrow
     * Suffering
     * Surprise
     * Suspicion
     * Trust
     * Wonder
     * Worry

     * v
     * t
     * e

   Nostalgia is a sentimentality for the past, typically for a period or
   place with happy personal associations.^[2] The word nostalgia is a
   learned formation of a Greek compound, consisting of νόστος (nóstos),
   meaning "homecoming", a Homeric word, and ἄλγος (álgos), meaning
   "sorrow" or "despair", and was coined by a 17th-century medical student
   to describe the anxieties displayed by Swiss mercenaries fighting away
   from home.^[3] Described as a medical condition—a form of melancholy—in
   the Early Modern period,^[4] it became an important trope in
   Romanticism.^[2]

   Nostalgia is associated with a longing for the past, its personalities,
   possibilities, and events, especially the "good ol' days" or a "warm
   childhood".^[5] There is a predisposition, caused by cognitive biases
   such as rosy retrospection, for people to view the past more favourably
   and future more negatively.^[6]^[7]^[8] When applied to one's beliefs
   about a society or institution, this is called declinism, which has
   been described as "a trick of the mind" and as "an emotional strategy,
   something comforting to snuggle up to when the present day seems
   intolerably bleak."^[9]

   The scientific literature on nostalgia usually refers to nostalgia
   regarding one's personal life and has mainly studied the effects of
   nostalgia as induced during these studies. Emotion is a strong evoker
   of nostalgia due to the processing of these stimuli first passing
   through the amygdala, the emotional seat of the brain. These
   recollections of one's past are usually important events, people one
   cares about, and places where one has spent time. Cultural phenomena
   such as music,^[10] movies, television shows,^[11] and video
   games,^[12] as well as natural phenomena such as weather and
   environment^[13] can also be strong triggers of nostalgia.
   [ ]

Contents

     * 1 Functions
          + 1.1 Improve mood
          + 1.2 Increase social connectedness
          + 1.3 Enhance positive self-regard
          + 1.4 Provide existential meaning
          + 1.5 Promote psychological growth
          + 1.6 As a deception
          + 1.7 As a comfort
          + 1.8 As a political tool
     * 2 Trigger factors
          + 2.1 Cultural
               o 2.1.1 Books
               o 2.1.2 Music
               o 2.1.3 Movies
               o 2.1.4 TV shows
               o 2.1.5 Video games
          + 2.2 Environmental
     * 3 Other aspects
          + 3.1 As a medical condition
          + 3.2 Romanticism
          + 3.3 In rhetoric and communication
          + 3.4 As an advertising tool
     * 4 See also
     * 5 References
     * 6 Further reading

Functions[edit]

   Nostalgia's definition has changed greatly over time. Consistent with
   its Greek word roots meaning "homecoming" and "pain," nostalgia was for
   centuries considered a potentially debilitating and sometimes fatal
   medical condition expressing extreme homesickness.^[4] The modern view
   is that nostalgia is an independent, and even positive, emotion that
   many people experience often. Nostalgia has been found to have
   important psychological functions, such as to improve mood, increase
   social connectedness, enhance positive self-regard, and provide
   existential meaning.^[14] Many nostalgic reflections serve more than
   one function, and overall seem to benefit those who experience them.
   Such benefits may lead to a chronic disposition or personality trait of
   "nostalgia proneness."^[15]^[16] Nostalgia has also been associated
   with learning and memory consolidation.^[17]

Improve mood[edit]

   Although nostalgia is often triggered by negative feelings, it results
   in increasing one's mood and heightening positive emotions, which can
   stem from feelings of warmth or coping resulting from nostalgic
   reflections. One way to improve mood is to effectively cope with
   problems that hinder one's happiness. Batcho (2013) found that
   nostalgia proneness positively related to successful methods of coping
   throughout all stages—planning and implementing strategies, and
   reframing the issue positively. These studies led to the conclusion
   that the coping strategies that are likely among nostalgia-prone people
   often lead to benefits during stressful times. Nostalgia can be
   connected to more focus on coping strategies and implementing them,
   thus increasing support in challenging times.^[18]

Increase social connectedness[edit]

   Further information: Living history
   Tweed run, 2013

   Nostalgia also sometimes involves memories of people one was close to,
   and thus it can increase one's sense of social support and connections.
   Nostalgia is also triggered specifically by feelings of loneliness, but
   counteracts such feelings with reflections of close relationships.
   According to Zhou et al. (2008), lonely people often have lesser
   perceptions of social support. Loneliness, however, leads to nostalgia,
   which actually increases perceptions of social support. Thus, Zhou and
   colleagues (2008) concluded that nostalgia serves a restorative
   function for individuals regarding their social connectedness.^[19]

   A desire for more social interaction is often the motivation for
   historical reenactments, which bring together people with a shared
   nostalgia for historical periods of past times. These events' hands-on,
   improvisational natures often facilitate socialization.^[20]

Enhance positive self-regard[edit]

   Nostalgia serves as a coping mechanism and helps people to feel better
   about themselves. Vess et al. (2012) found that the subjects who
   thought of nostalgic memories showed greater accessibility of positive
   characteristics than those who thought of exciting future experiences.
   Additionally, in a second study conducted, some participants were
   exposed to nostalgic engagement and reflection while the other group
   was not. The researchers looked again at self-attributes and found that
   the participants who were not exposed to nostalgic experiences
   reflected a pattern of selfish and self-centered attributes. Vess et
   al. (2012), however, found that this effect had weakened and become
   less powerful among the participants who engaged in nostalgic
   reflection.^[21]

Provide existential meaning[edit]

   Nostalgia helps increase one's self-esteem and meaning in life by
   buffering threats to well-being and also by initiating a desire to deal
   with problems or stress. Routledge (2011) and colleagues found that
   nostalgia correlates positively with one's sense of meaning in life.
   The second study revealed that nostalgia increases one's perceived
   meaning in life, which was thought to be mediated by a sense of social
   support or connectedness. Thirdly, the researchers found that
   threatened meaning can even act as a trigger for nostalgia, thus
   increasing one's nostalgic reflections. By triggering nostalgia,
   though, one's defensiveness to such threat is minimized as found in the
   fourth study. The final two studies found that nostalgia is able to not
   only create meaning but buffer threats to meaning by breaking the
   connection between a lack of meaning and one's well-being. Follow-up
   studies also completed by Routledge in 2012 not only found meaning as a
   function of nostalgia, but also concluded that nostalgic people have
   greater perceived meaning, search for meaning less, and can better
   buffer existential threat.^[22]^[23]

Promote psychological growth[edit]

   Nostalgia makes people more willing to engage in growth-oriented
   behaviors and encourages them to view themselves as growth-oriented
   people. Baldwin &amp; Landau (2014) found that nostalgia leads people to
   rate themselves higher on items like "I am the kind of person who
   embraces unfamiliar people, events, and places." Nostalgia also
   increased interest in growth-related behavior such as "I would like to
   explore someplace that I have never been before." In the first study,
   these effects were statistically mediated by nostalgia-induced positive
   affect—the extent to which nostalgia made participants feel good. In
   the second study, nostalgia led to the same growth outcomes but the
   effects were statistically mediated by nostalgia-induced
   self-esteem.^[24]

As a deception[edit]

   One recent study critiques the idea of nostalgia, which in some forms
   can become a defense mechanism by which people avoid the historical
   facts.^[25] This study looked at the different portrayals of apartheid
   in South Africa and argued that nostalgia appears as two ways,^[26]
   'restorative nostalgia' a wish to return to that past, and 'reflective
   nostalgia' which is more critically aware.

As a comfort[edit]

   Reliving past memories may provide comfort and contribute to mental
   health.^[27] One notable recent medical study has looked at the
   physiological effects thinking about past 'good' memories can have.
   They found that thinking about the past 'fondly' actually increased
   perceptions of physical warmth.^[28]

As a political tool[edit]

   In a 2014 study conducted by Routledge, he and a team observed that the
   more people reported having major disruptions and uncertainties in
   their lives, the more they nostalgically longed for the past. Routledge
   suggests that by invoking the idea of an idealized past, politicians
   can provoke the social and cultural anxieties and uncertainties that
   make nostalgia especially attractive—and effective—as a tool of
   political persuasion.^[29]^[30]

Trigger factors[edit]

Cultural[edit]

Books[edit]

   A person can deliberately trigger feelings of nostalgia by listening to
   familiar music, looking at old photos, or visiting comforting
   environments of the past.^[31] With this knowledge widely available,
   many books have been published specifically to evoke the feeling of
   nostalgia. Books are just one of many media used in the monetization of
   nostalgia^[32]^[circular reference].

Music[edit]

   Hearing an old song can bring back memories for a person. A song heard
   once at a specific moment and then not heard again until a far later
   date will give the listener a sense of nostalgia for the date
   remembered and events that occurred then. However, if it is heard
   throughout life, it may lose its association with any specific period
   or experience.^[10]

Movies[edit]

   Old movies can trigger nostalgia. This is particularly true for
   generations who grew up as children during specific film eras such as
   the animation renaissance of the 1990s. Rewatching classic movies can
   be therapeutic in nature, healing emotional wounds using happy
   childhood memories.^[11]

TV shows[edit]

   Old television shows can trigger nostalgia. People gravitate towards
   shows they watched as children, as the memories from one's youth are
   often the most significant of their lives.^[11]

Video games[edit]

   Old video games can trigger nostalgia. Retro gaming has become a
   recreational activity among older generations who played them as
   children.^[12]

Environmental[edit]

   Nature-based factors such as weather and temperature can trigger
   nostalgia. Scientific studies have shown that cold weather makes people
   more nostalgic, while nostalgia causes people to feel warmer.^[13] In
   some societies, elements of nature often trigger a nostalgia for past
   times when nature played a larger role in culture.^[33] Environmental
   philosopher Glenn Albrecht coined the term 'solastalgia' in his 2003
   book Solastalgia: a new concept in human health and identity.^[34] The
   word is formed from the Latin sōlācium (comfort) and the Greek root
   ἄλγος (pain, suffering) to describe a form of emotional or existential
   distress caused by environmental destruction. Nostalgia differs from
   solastalgia because nostalgia is typically generated by spatial
   separation from important places or persons (one's home, one's family,
   or loved ones) with which it is often possible, in principle, to
   reconnect. With solastalgia, in contrast, the grief is typically caused
   by environmental destruction, so the separation between subject and
   object is ontological rather than spatial: it is permanent and
   unbridgeable, and can be experienced while continuing to occupy the
   same irreversibly degraded place.

Other aspects[edit]

As a medical condition[edit]

   Further information: Homesickness

   The term was coined in 1688 by Johannes Hofer (1669–1752) in his Basel
   dissertation. Hofer introduced nostalgia or mal du pays "homesickness"
   for the condition also known as mal du Suisse "Swiss illness", because
   of its frequent occurrence in Swiss mercenaries who in the plains of
   Switzerland were pining for their landscapes. Symptoms were also
   thought to include fainting, high fever, and death.

   English homesickness is a loan translation of nostalgia. Sir Joseph
   Banks used the word in his journal during the first voyage of Captain
   Cook. On 3 September 1770 he stated that the sailors "were now pretty
   far gone with the longing for home which the Physicians have gone so
   far as to esteem a disease under the name of Nostalgia", but his
   journal was not published in his lifetime.^[35] Cases resulting in
   death were known and soldiers were sometimes successfully treated by
   being discharged and sent home. Receiving a diagnosis was, however,
   generally regarded as an insult.

   In the eighteenth century, scientists were looking for a locus of
   nostalgia, a nostalgic bone. By the 1850s nostalgia was losing its
   status as a particular disease and coming to be seen rather as a
   symptom or stage of a pathological process. It was considered as a form
   of melancholia and a predisposing condition among suicides. Nostalgia
   was, however, still diagnosed among soldiers as late as the American
   Civil War.^[36] By the 1870s interest in nostalgia as a medical
   category had almost completely vanished. Nostalgia was still being
   recognized in both the First and Second World Wars, especially by the
   American armed forces. Great lengths were taken to study and understand
   the condition to stem the tide of troops leaving the front in droves
   (see the BBC documentary Century of the Self).

   Nostalgia is triggered by something reminding an individual of an event
   or item from their past. The resulting emotion can vary from happiness
   to sorrow. The term "feeling nostalgic" is more commonly used to
   describe pleasurable emotions associated with and/or a longing to go
   back to a particular period of time.

Romanticism[edit]

   Swiss nostalgia was linked to the singing of Kuhreihen, which were
   forbidden to Swiss mercenaries because they led to nostalgia to the
   point of desertion, illness or death. The 1767 Dictionnaire de Musique
   by Jean-Jacques Rousseau claims that Swiss mercenaries were threatened
   with severe punishment to prevent them from singing their Swiss songs.
   It became somewhat of a topos in Romantic literature, and figures in
   the poem Der Schweizer by Achim von Arnim (1805) and in Clemens
   Brentano's Des Knaben Wunderhorn (1809) as well as in the opera Le
   Chalet by Adolphe Charles Adam (1834) which was performed for Queen
   Victoria under the title The Swiss Cottage. The Romantic connection of
   nostalgia, was a significant factor in the enthusiasm for Switzerland
   and the development of early Tourism in Switzerland that took hold of
   the European cultural elite in the 19th century. German Romanticism
   coined an opposite to Heimweh, Fernweh "far-sickness," "longing to be
   far away," like wanderlust expressing the Romantic desire to travel and
   explore.

In rhetoric and communication[edit]

   Nostalgia has been frequently studied as a tool of rhetoric and
   persuasion. Communication scholar Stephen Depoe,^[37] for example,
   writes that in nostalgic messaging: “a speaker highlights a comparison
   between a more favorable, idealized past and a less favorable present
   in order to stimulate [nostalgia]. . . . [linking] his/her own policies
   to qualities of the idealized past in order to induce support” (179).
   Rhetorician William Kurlinkus^[38]^[39] taxonomizes nostalgia on this
   foundation, arguing that nostalgic rhetoric generally contains three
   parts:
    1. A loss or threat in the present: the chaotic change that nostalgia
       responds to. Though some theorists^[40] argue that the ideal must
       truly be lost, other scholars including Kurlinkus argue that the
       ideal may simply be threatened to trigger nostalgia.
    2. A nostalgic crux: a person, group, corporation, et al. that is
       blamed for the loss of the nostalgic ideal. To perform such
       scapegoating, the nostalgic crux is usually presented as a force of
       newness and change. Defeating this outsider is positioned as a
       source of recovering the good memory. Such cruxes have include
       groups from polluting corporations to immigrants.
    3. Hope: Finally, Kurlinkus argues that though nostalgia is often
       performed ironically it almost always has a true hope for
       recovering the god memory (whether this means some kind of true
       restoration or a more symbolic recovery of an ethic). Such hope
       differentiates nostalgia from similar emotions like melancholia,
       which contains all of nostalgia's longing for lost ideals without a
       desire to move out of that past.

   Kurlinkus coined the term "nostalgic other" to describe the ways in
   which some populations of people become trapped in other people's
   nostalgic stories of them, idealized as natural while simultaneously
   denied sovereignty or the right to change in the present. "Nostalgic
   others differ from other scholarly discourse in that their alterity is
   not primarily based in race or ethnicity." Kurlinkus wrote. "Rather, in
   concurrent identifications and divisions, the nostalgic other is
   distinguished from the rhetor by time. We live in the present; they
   live in the past. The creation of the nostalgic other allows mainstream
   populations to commodify the racial purity and stability of the past
   but refuses the community agency to change in the present by
   highlighting its negative traits.

As an advertising tool[edit]

   In media and advertising, nostalgia-evoking images, sounds, and
   references can be used strategically to create a sense of connectedness
   between consumers and products with the goal of convincing the public
   to consume, watch, or buy advertised products.^[41] Modern technology
   facilitates nostalgia-eliciting advertising through the subject, style,
   and design of an advertisement.^[42] The feeling of longing for the
   past is easily communicated through social media and advertising
   because these media require the participation of multiple senses, are
   able to represent their ideas entirely, and therefore become more
   reminiscent of life.

   Due to efficient advertising schemes, consumers need not have
   experienced a specific event or moment in time in order to feel
   nostalgic for it. This is due to a phenomenon referred to as vicarious
   nostalgia. Vicarious nostalgia is a feeling of wistful yearning for a
   moment that occurred prior to, or outside of, the span of one's memory,
   but is relatable (has sentimental value) due to repeated mediated
   exposure to it.^[43] The constant propagating of advertisements and
   other media messages makes vicarious nostalgia possible, and changes
   the ways we understand advertisements and subsequently, the way
   consumers use their purchasing power.

   Examples of nostalgia used to provoke public interest include
   nostalgia-themed websites^[44] such as The Nostalgia Machine and
   DoYouRemember?, and revamps of old movies,^[45] TV shows, and books.
   Vintage, rustic and old-fashioned design styles can also be seen in
   nostalgia-based ad campaigns that companies such as Coca-Cola and Levi
   Strauss &amp; Co. use.^[43]

   Developed within the marketing discipline, forestalgia[1], defined as
   an individual's yearning for an idealized future, serves as a
   future-focused counterpart to nostalgia.^[46] Like nostalgia, where
   only the happy memories are retained, forestalgia explains customers’
   intentions to escape the present to a romanticized future where current
   concerns are no longer an issue. Marketing researchers found that when
   promoting hedonic and utilitarian products, far-past nostalgia and
   far-future forestalgia advertisements were most effective in the
   promotion of utilitarian products. In contrast, hedonic products were
   better suited for advertisements framed in far-past nostalgia or
   near-future forestalgia.

See also[edit]

     * Americana
     * Declinism
     * Golden age (metaphor)
     * Hauntology
     * Historic preservation
     * Mono no aware
     * Nostalgia industry
     * Nostalgia for the Soviet Union
     * Neo-Stalinism
     * Nostalgia Night
     * Old-time radio
     * Ostalgie
     * Recency bias
     * Retro style
     * Rosy retrospection
     * Saudade
     * Sehnsucht
     * Solastalgia
     * Vaporwave
     * Vintage (design)
     * Yugo-nostalgia

References[edit]

    1. ^ Mills, Wes (July 6, 2021). "Saturday Evening Post Celebrates 200
       Years". Inside Indiana Business. Archived from the original on
       November 19, 2021.
    2. ^ ^a ^b Boym, Svetlana (2002). The Future of Nostalgia. Basic
       Books. pp. xiii–xiv. ISBN 978-0-465-00708-0.
    3. ^ Fuentenebro; de Diego, F; Valiente, C (2014). "Nostalgia: a
       conceptual history". History of Psychiatry. 25 (4): 404–411.
       doi:10.1177/0957154X14545290. PMID 25395438.
    4. ^ ^a ^b Dahl, Melissa (February 25, 2016). "The Little-Known
       Medical History of Homesickness". New York. Archived from the
       original on March 1, 2016.
    5. ^ Sedikides, Constantine; Wildschut, Tim; Arndt, Jamie; Routledge,
       Clay (October 2008). "Nostalgia: Past, Present, and Future".
       Current Directions in Psychological Science. 17 (5): 304–307.
       doi:10.1111/j.1467-8721.2008.00595.x. S2CID 220389609.
    6. ^ The Oxford Dictionary of American Political Slang edited by Grant
       Barrett, p. 90.
    7. ^ Etchells, Pete (January 16, 2015). "Declinism: is the world
       actually getting worse?". The Guardian. Retrieved 20 December 2016.
    8. ^ Steven R. Quartz, The State Of The World Isn't Nearly As Bad As
       You Think, Edge Foundation, Inc., retrieved 2016-02-17
    9. ^ Lewis, Jemima (January 16, 2016). "Why we yearn for the good old
       days". The Telegraph. Retrieved 20 December 2016.
   10. ^ ^a ^b "Music-Evoked Nostalgia".
   11. ^ ^a ^b ^c Nelakonda, Divya. "Binging on nostalgia – why we replay
       TV from our youth". the Epic. Retrieved 2022-01-14.
   12. ^ ^a ^b McCarthy, Anne. "Why Retro-Looking Games Get So Much Love".
       Wired. ISSN 1059-1028. Retrieved 2022-01-14.
   13. ^ ^a ^b "Study: Nostalgia Makes Us Warm, and Cold Makes Us
       Nostalgic". The Atlantic. 2012-12-04.
   14. ^ Wildschut, Tim; Sedikides, Constantine; Arndt, Jamie; Routledge,
       Clay (2006). "Nostalgia: Content, triggers, functions" (PDF).
       Journal of Personality and Social Psychology. 91 (5): 975–993.
       doi:10.1037/0022-3514.91.5.975. PMID 17059314.
   15. ^ Vanessa Köneke: More bitter than sweet - Are nostalgic people
       rather sad than happy after all? GRIN Verlag GmbH, München 2010,
       ISBN 978-3640942268.
   16. ^ Schindler, Robert M.; Holbrook, Morris B. (2003-04-01).
       "Nostalgia for early experience as a determinant of consumer
       preferences". Psychology and Marketing. 20 (4): 275–302.
       CiteSeerX 10.1.1.520.403. doi:10.1002/mar.10074. ISSN 1520-6793.
   17. ^ Oba K.; Noriuchi M.; Atomi T.; Moriguchi Y.; Kikuchi Y.
       (2015-06-04). "Memory and reward systems coproduce 'nostalgic'
       experiences in the brain". Social Cognitive and Affective
       Neuroscience. 11 (7): 1069–1077. doi:10.1093/scan/nsv073.
       PMC 4927028. PMID 26060325.
   18. ^ Batcho, K. I. (2013). "Nostalgia: Retreat or support in difficult
       times?" The American Journal of Psychology,
   19. ^ Zhou, X.; Sedikides, C.; Wildschut, T.; Gao, D. (2008).
       "Counteracting loneliness: On the restorative function of
       nostalgia" (PDF). Psychological Science. 19 (10): 1023–1029.
       doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02194.x. PMID 19000213.
       S2CID 45398320.
   20. ^ Howard Giles. "A Brief History of Re-enactment".
   21. ^ Vess, M.; Arndt, J.; Routledge, C.; Sedikides, C.; Wildschut, T.
       (2012). "Nostalgia as a resource for the self". Self and Identity.
       11 (3): 273–284. doi:10.1080/15298868.2010.521452. S2CID 56018071.
   22. ^ Routledge, C.; Arndt, J.; Wildschut, T.; Sedikides, C.; Hart, C.
       M. (2011). "The past makes the present meaningful: Nostalgia as an
       existential resource". Journal of Personality and Social
       Psychology. 101 (3): 638–652. doi:10.1037/a0024292. PMID 21787094.
   23. ^ Routledge, C.; Wildschut, T.; Sedikides, C.; Juhl, J.; Arndt, J.
       (2012). "The power of the past: Nostalgia as a meaning-making
       resource". Memory. 20 (5): 452–460.
       doi:10.1080/09658211.2012.677452. PMID 22639901. S2CID 15357239.
   24. ^ Baldwin, M.; Landau, M.J. (2014). "Exploring nostalgia's
       influence on psychological growth". Self and Identity. 13 (2):
       162–177. doi:10.1080/15298868.2013.772320. S2CID 6319780.
   25. ^ Hook, D.(2012) "Screened history: Nostalgia as defensive
       formation." Peace and Conflict: Journal of Peace Psychology, Vol
       18(3), Aug, 2012. Special issue: Of Narratives and Nostalgia. pp.
       225–239
   26. ^ Boym, S. (2001). The future of nostalgia. New York, NY: Basic
       Books
   27. ^ John Tierney (July 8, 2013). "What Is Nostalgia Good For? Quite a
       Bit, Research Shows". The New York Times. Retrieved July 9, 2013.
   28. ^ Zhou, Xinyue; Wildschut, Tim; Sedikides, Constantine; Chen,
       Xiaoxi; Vingerhoets, Ad J. J. M. (2012). "Heartwarming memories:
       Nostalgia maintains physiological comfort". Emotion. 12 (4):
       678–684. doi:10.1037/a0027236. PMID 22390713.
   29. ^ Sedikides, C.; Wildschut, T.; Routledge, C.; Arndt, J. (2015).
       "Nostalgia counteracts self-discontinuity and restores
       self-continuity" (PDF). European Journal of Social Psychology. 45
       (1): 52–61. doi:10.1002/ejsp.2073.
   30. ^ Routledge, Clay (October 31, 2017). "Approach With Caution:
       Nostalgia Is a Potent Political Agent". Undark Magazine.
   31. ^ "The Brain and Nostalgia".
   32. ^ Nostalgia industry
   33. ^ William J. Havlena &amp; Susan L. Holak (2015). The Role of Nature in
       the Nostalgic Experience of the Japanese. Springer. Developments in
       Marketing Science: Proceedings of the Academy of Marketing Science.
       pp. 128–134. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-17383-2_21.
       ISBN 978-3-319-17382-5.
   34. ^ Albrecht, G. (2005). Solastalgia: a new concept in human health
       and identity. PAN Partners. OCLC 993784860.
   35. ^ Beaglehole, J. C. (ed.). The Endeavour Journal of Joseph Banks
       1768–1771, Public Library of New South Wales/Angus and Robertson,
       Sydney, 1962, vol. ii, p. 145
   36. ^ Wisconsin Public Radio, To the Best of Our Knowledge, "Svetlana
       Boym on Nostalgia", 2002 November 3
   37. ^ Depoe, Stephen (1990). "Requiem for Liberalism: The Therapeutic
       and Deliberative Functions of Nostalgic Appeals in Edward Kennedy's
       Address to the 1980 Democratic National Convention". Southern
       Journal of Communication. 55 (2): 175–190.
       doi:10.1080/10417949009372786.
   38. ^ Kurlinkus, William (2021). "Nostalgic Design: Making Memories in
       the Rhetoric Classroom". Rhetoric Society Quarterly. 51 (5):
       422–438. doi:10.1080/02773945.2021.1972133. S2CID 244136140.
   39. ^ Kurlinkus, W. (2019). 1. Nostalgic Design: Rhetoric, Memory, and
       Democratizing Technology. U Pittsburgh Press. ISBN 9780822965527.
   40. ^ (Davis)
   41. ^ Lizardi, R. (2015). Mediated Nostalgia. Maryland: Lexington
       Books.
   42. ^ Niemeyer, K. (2014). Media and Nostalgia. Palgrave Macmillan.
       ISBN 978-1-137-37588-9.
   43. ^ ^a ^b Merchant, A (2013). "Effects of advertising evoked
       vicarious nostalgia in brand heritage". Journal of Business
       Research: 66.
   44. ^ "DoYouRemember.com". DoYouRemember?. DoYouRemember? Inc.
       Retrieved 25 October 2019.
   45. ^ "Oceans 11 1960 Version". IMDB.
   46. ^ Barnwell, R Wixel; Collier, Joel; Shanahan, Kevin J (5 April
       2022). "Nostalgia and Forestalgia: Insights, Evaluation, and
       Implications for Advertising and Product Typology". Journal of
       Advertising. 50 (5): 19. doi:10.1080/00913367.2022.2036652.
       S2CID 247988600. Retrieved 8 April 2022.

Further reading[edit]

     * Barnwell, R. Wixel, Joel Collier, and Kevin J. Shanahan. "Nostalgia
       and Forestalgia: Insights, Evaluation, and Implications for
       Advertising and Product Typology." Journal of Advertising (2022):
       1-18. [2]
     * Bartholeyns, G. (2014). "The instant past: Nostalgia and digital
       photo retro photography." Media and Nostalgia. Yearning for the
       past, present and future, ed. K. Niemeyer (Palgrave Macmillan):
       51–69.
     *

   Batcho, K. I. (2013). "Nostalgia: Retreat or support in difficult
   times?". The American Journal of Psychology. 126 (3): 355–367.
   doi:10.5406/amerjpsyc.126.3.0355. PMID 24027948.

     Simon Bunke: Heimweh. Studien zur Kultur- und Literaturgeschichte
   einer tödlichen Krankheit. (Homesickness. On the Cultural and Literary
   History of a Lethal Disease). Freiburg 2009. 674 pp.

     Boulbry, Gaëlle and Borges, Adilson. Évaluation d’une échelle
   anglo-saxonne de mesure du tempérament nostalgique dans un contexte
   culturel français (Evaluation of an anglo-saxon scale of measurement of
   nostalgic mood in a French cultural context)

     Dominic Boyer, "Ostalgie and the Politics of the Future in Eastern
   Germany." Public Culture 18(2):361-381.

     Simon Bunke: Heimweh. In: Bettina von Jagow / Florian Steger (Eds.):
   Literatur und Medizin im europäischen Kontext. Ein Lexikon. Göttingen:
   Vandenhoeck &amp; Ruprecht 2005. Sp. 380–384.

     Niemeyer, Katharina (ed. 2014), Media and Nostalgia. Yearning for the
   past, present and future'(Palgrave Macmillan.

     Coromines i Vigneaux, Joan. Diccionari etimològic i complementari de
   la llengua catalana [Barcelona, Curial Edicions Catalanes, 1983]

     Davis, Fred Yearning for Yesterday: a Sociology of Nostalgia. New
   York: Free Press, 1979.

     Freeman, Lindsey A., Longing for the Bomb: Oak Ridge and Atomic
   Nostalgia. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2015.

     Hofer, Johannes, "Medical Dissertation on Nostalgia." Bulletin of the
   Institute of the History of Medicine. Trans. Carolyn Kiser Anspach 2.6
   ((1688) Aug. 1934): 376–91.

     Hunter, Richard and Macalpine, Ida. Three Hundred Years of
   Psychiatry:1535–1860, [Hartsdale, NY, Carlisle Publishing, Inc, 1982]

     Hutcheon, Linda "Irony, Nostalgia, and the Postmodern"

     Jameson, Fredric (1989). "Nostalgia for the Present". The South
   Atlantic Quarterly. 88 (2): 527–60.

     Thurber, Christopher A. and Marian D. Sigman, "Preliminary Models of
   Risk and Protective Factors for Childhood Homesickness: Review and
   Empirical Synthesis." Child Development 69:4 (Aug. 1998): 903–34.

     Dylan Trigg, The Aesthetics of Decay: Nothingness, Nostalgia, and the
   Absence of Reason (New York: Peter Lang, 2006) [3]

     Linda M. Austin, 'Emily Brontë's Homesickness', Victorian Studies,
   44:4 (summer 2002): 573–596.

     Simon Bunke: Heimwehforschung.de

     BBC Four Documentaries - The Century of the Self

     Zhou, X.; Sedikides, C.; Wildschut, T.; Gao, D. (2008).
   "Counteracting loneliness: On the restorative function of nostalgia"
   (PDF). Psychological Science. 19 (10): 1023–1029.
   doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02194.x. PMID 19000213. S2CID 45398320.

     Vess, M.; Arndt, J.; Routledge, C.; Sedikides, C.; Wildschut, T.
   (2012). "Nostalgia as a resource for the self". Self and Identity. 11
   (3): 273–284. doi:10.1080/15298868.2010.521452. S2CID 56018071.

     Rieter, O.,
   http://www.barbarus.org/single-post/2015/08/22/Nostalgia-as-a-way-of-cr
   eating-meaning-in-everyday-life

     Routledge, C.; Wildschut, T.; Sedikides, C.; Juhl, J.; Arndt, J.
   (2012). "The power of the past: Nostalgia as a meaning-making
   resource". Memory. 20 (5): 452–460. doi:10.1080/09658211.2012.677452.
   PMID 22639901. S2CID 15357239.

     Routledge, C.; Arndt, J.; Wildschut, T.; Sedikides, C.; Hart, C. M.
   (2011). "The past makes the present meaningful: Nostalgia as an
   existential resource". Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.
   101 (3): 638–652. doi:10.1037/a0024292. PMID 21787094.

     Köneke, V. (2010). More bitter than sweet - Are nostalgic people
   rather sad than happy after all? GRIN Verlag GmbH, Munich, Germany.
   ISBN

     Gilad Padva, Queer Nostalgia in Cinema and Pop Culture (Basingstock,
   UK and New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014). 254 pp.

   Look up nostalgia in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

   Wikiquote has quotations related to Nostalgia.

     * v
     * t
     * e

   Emotions (list)

   Emotions

     * Acceptance
     * Admiration
     * Adoration
     * Aesthetic
     * Affection
     * Agitation
     * Agony
     * Amusement
     * Anger
     * Angst
     * Anguish
     * Annoyance
     * Anticipation
     * Anxiety
     * Apathy
     * Arousal
     * Attraction
     * Awe
     * Boredom
     * Calmness
     * Compassion
     * Confidence
     * Confusion
     * Contempt
     * Contentment
     * Courage
     * Cruelty
     * Curiosity
     * Defeat
     * Depression
     * Desire
     * Disappointment
     * Disgust
     * Distrust
     * Doubt
     * Ecstasy
     * Embarrassment
          + vicarious
     * Empathy
     * Emptiness
     * Enthrallment
     * Enthusiasm
     * Envy
     * Euphoria
     * Excitement
     * Faith
     * Fear
     * Flow
     * Frustration
     * Gratification
     * Gratitude
     * Greed
     * Grief
     * Guilt
     * Happiness
     * Hatred
     * Hiraeth
     * Homesickness
     * Hope
     * Horror
     * Hostility
     * Humiliation
     * Hygge
     * Hysteria
     * Indulgence
     * Infatuation
     * Insecurity
     * Inspiration
     * Interest
     * Irritation
     * Isolation
     * Jealousy
     * Joy
     * Kindness
     * Loneliness
     * Love
          + limerence
     * Lust
     * Mono no aware
     * Neglect
     * Nostalgia
     * Outrage
     * Panic
     * Passion
     * Pity
          + self-pity
     * Pleasure
     * Pride
          + grandiosity
          + hubris
          + insult
          + vanity
     * Rage
     * Regret
     * Rejection
     * Relief
     * Remorse
     * Resentment
     * Sadness
          + melancholy
     * Saudade
     * Schadenfreude
     * Sehnsucht
     * Sentimentality
     * Shame
     * Shock
     * Shyness
     * Social connection
     * Sorrow
     * Spite
     * Stress
          + chronic
     * Suffering
     * Surprise
     * Sympathy
     * Trust
     * Wonder
          + sense of wonder
     * Worry

   Plutchik-wheel.svg
   Plutchik Dyads.svg

   Worldviews

     * Cynicism
     * Defeatism
     * Nihilism
     * Optimism
     * Pessimism
     * Reclusion
     * Weltschmerz

   Related

     * Affect
          + consciousness
          + in education
          + measures
          + in psychology
     * Affective
          + computing
          + forecasting
          + neuroscience
          + science
          + spectrum
     * Affectivity
          + positive
          + negative
     * Appeal to emotion
     * Amygdala hijack
     * Emotion
          + and art
          + and memory
          + and music
          + and sex
          + and sleep
          + classification
          + evolution
          + expressed
          + functional accounts
          + group
          + homeostatic
          + in animals
          + perception
          + recognition
               o in conversation
          + regulation
               o interpersonal
          + work
     * Emotional
          + aperture
          + bias
          + blackmail
          + competence
          + conflict
          + contagion
          + detachment
          + dysregulation
          + eating
          + exhaustion
          + expression
               o and gender
          + intelligence
               o and bullying
               o Empathy quotient
          + intimacy
          + isolation
          + lability
          + labor
          + lateralization
          + literacy
          + prosody
          + reasoning
          + responsivity
          + security
          + symbiosis
          + Emotional thought method
          + well-being
     * Emotionality
          + bounded
     * Emotions
          + and culture
          + history
          + in decision-making
          + in the workplace
          + in virtual communication
          + moral
          + self-conscious
          + social
          + social sharing
          + sociology
     * Feeling
     * Group affective tone
     * Interactions between the emotional and executive brain systems
     * Jealousy in art
     * Meta-emotion
     * Pathognomy
     * Pathos
     * Social emotional development
     * Stoic passions
     * Theory
          + affect
          + appraisal
          + constructed emotion
          + discrete emotion
          + somatic marker

   Italics indicate emotion names in foreign languages

   Authority control: National libraries Edit this at Wikidata
     * France (data)
     * Germany
     * Israel
     * United States
     * Czech Republic

   Retrieved from
   "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nostalgia&amp;oldid=1119774620"

   Categories:
     * Nostalgia
     * Emotions
     * 17th-century neologisms

   Hidden categories:
     * Articles with short description
     * Short description is different from Wikidata
     * Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text
     * All articles lacking reliable references
     * Articles lacking reliable references from August 2019
     * Articles containing Welsh-language text
     * Articles containing Danish-language text
     * Articles containing Japanese-language text
     * Articles containing Portuguese-language text
     * Articles containing German-language text
     * Articles with BNF identifiers
     * Articles with GND identifiers
     * Articles with J9U identifiers
     * Articles with LCCN identifiers
     * Articles with NKC identifiers

Navigation menu

Personal tools

     * Not logged in
     * Talk
     * Contributions
     * Create account
     * Log in

Namespaces

     * Article
     * Talk

   [ ] English

Views

     * Read
     * Edit
     * View history

   [ ] More

   ____________________ Search Go

Navigation

     * Main page
     * Contents
     * Current events
     * Random article
     * About Wikipedia
     * Contact us
     * Donate

Contribute

     * Help
     * Learn to edit
     * Community portal
     * Recent changes
     * Upload file

Tools

     * What links here
     * Related changes
     * Upload file
     * Special pages
     * Permanent link
     * Page information
     * Cite this page
     * Wikidata item

Print/export

     * Download as PDF
     * Printable version

In other projects

     * Wikimedia Commons
     * Wikiquote
     * Wikivoyage

Languages

     * Afrikaans
     * العربية
     * Avañe'ẽ
     * Azərbaycanca
     * বাংলা
     * Bân-lâm-gú
     * Български
     * བོད་ཡིག
     * Català
     * Čeština
     * Dansk
     * Deutsch
     * Eesti
     * Ελληνικά
     * Español
     * Esperanto
     * Euskara
     * فارسی
     * Français
     * 한국어
     * Հայերեն
     * हिन्दी
     * Hrvatski
     * Ido
     * Bahasa Indonesia
     * Íslenska
     * Italiano
     * עברית
     * Lietuvių
     * Magyar
     * Македонски
     * مصرى
     * مازِرونی
     * Bahasa Melayu
     * Nederlands
     * Nedersaksies
     * 日本語
     * Norsk bokmål
     * Norsk nynorsk
     * Occitan
     * Oʻzbekcha/ўзбекча
     * ਪੰਜਾਬੀ
     * Polski
     * Português
     * Română
     * Русский
     * Sicilianu
     * Simple English
     * Slovenčina
     * Soomaaliga
     * کوردی
     * Српски / srpski
     * Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски
     * Suomi
     * Svenska
     * தமிழ்
     * Türkçe
     * Українська
     * اردو
     * Tiếng Việt
     * 吴语
     * 中文

   Edit links

     * This page was last edited on 3 November 2022, at 10:00 (UTC).
     * Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike
       License 3.0; additional terms may apply. By using this site, you
       agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia® is a
       registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a
       non-profit organization.

     * Privacy policy
     * About Wikipedia
     * Disclaimers
     * Contact Wikipedia
     * Mobile view
     * Developers
     * Statistics
     * Cookie statement

     * Wikimedia Foundation
     * Powered by MediaWiki
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-40">
<text>
                                403 Forbidden
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    nginx
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-41">
<text>
   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-NX5LSK3

   Skip to main content
   The New Yorker
     * Newsletter

   To revisit this article, select My Account, then View saved stories
   (BUTTON) Close Alert
   Sign In
   Search
     * News
     * Books &amp; Culture
     * Fiction &amp; Poetry
     * Humor &amp; Cartoons
     * Magazine
     * Puzzles &amp; Games
     * Video
     * Podcasts
     * Archive
     * Goings On
     * Shop

   (BUTTON) Open Navigation Menu

   To revisit this article, visit My Profile, then View saved stories
   (BUTTON) Close Alert
   The New Yorker
   Science and Tech
     * Can Computers Learn Common Sense?
     * The Ocean’s Most Delicate Species
     * The Science of Puppies
     * Old Timber, New Climate Data

   Annals of Technology

Why a Great Wave of Nostalgia Is Sweeping Through China

   By Amanda R. Martinez
   May 30, 2013
     *
     *
     *
     *
     * Save this story for later.

     *
     *
     *
     *
     * Save this story for later.

   Why a Great Wave of Nostalgia Is Sweeping Through China

   At the No. 8 Hot Pot Restaurant in Beijing, a school bell rings at 5:30
   P.M. sharp. Diners sit at old-style wooden desks rather than tables.
   The menu is a multiple-choice test. Instead of waiters, there are class
   monitors, who respond to raised hands. Not everyone can eat here,
   though. The restaurant is designed exclusively for people born between
   1980 and 1989; I.D.s are checked at the door.

   “We don’t mean to exclude anyone,” said Yuan Bao, the owner, an affable
   thirty-two-year-old with long bangs, dressed in cargo pants and a
   T-shirt with a skull on it. It’s just that “we know we all have similar
   memories and experiences.” Yuan’s goal is to create a safe space where
   his patrons can recall a very specific era of childhood innocence. It
   appears to be working: when the tinny, saccharine strains of a classic
   children’s song came on the restaurant’s sound system, one
   twenty-five-year-old diner said that it made her want to cry.

   The classroom restaurant is part of a wave of nostalgia sweeping the
   generation of Chinese born between 1980 and 1989, known in China as
   baling hou, or “post-eighties.” In late 2010, in the eleven days after
   an online video featuring two young men performing Michael Jackson’s
   “Billie Jean” was posted, the forty-two-minute film was viewed more
   than seven million times, provoking an outpouring of comments from
   twenty and thirtysomethings who confessed to being moved to tears. The
   same generational cohort has also been flocking to the country’s few
   remaining state-run department stores, which predate China’s economic
   reform and which have been rendered all but extinct by Western-style
   malls. With their hodgepodge of merchandise, the stores bear a striking
   resemblance to America’s five-and-dimes—save for the faded Mao posters
   and the use of abaci to tally up orders—and are among the only places
   where young people can find guohuo, the state-produced consumer
   products they grew up with. Mrs. Zhang, an employee at the Youn’an
   department store in southwest Beijing, said that, when members of the
   post-eighties generation started showing up, a couple of years ago,
   they looked around and were transported back. As if on cue, a
   twenty-six-year-old man appeared. Reflecting on a cluster of tin cups,
   he said, “I used to play with these when I was little.”

   Such outbreaks of bittersweet sentiments are perhaps an expression of
   China’s strong interest in its own history, or attempts at maintaining
   a sense of cultural continuity—albeit a variant that favors one’s
   personal experience of the past. But recent psychological research on
   the cognitive function of nostalgia suggests that the cause of this
   wave could be the post-eighties’ contemporary social experience.

   A number of studies have revealed that when we suffer from certain
   psychological ailments—loneliness, social isolation, self-doubt,
   negative mood, and the feeling that life is meaningless—nostalgia can
   act as a coping mechanism. Such ailments can cause the mind to sift
   through its cache of memories, summoning up those with a particular
   narrative signature. Researchers analyzed hundreds of nostalgic
   accounts, and found that they typically featured family and friends, a
   momentous event, or, often, both. The participant describing the memory
   was almost always the protagonist, and the narrative arc was generally
   one of redemption: at first, conditions may have seemed grim or
   hopeless, but eventually things were resolved in a favorable ending.
   Through nostalgia, the researchers claimed, we bring back to the
   surface evidence of past triumphs and close relationships, times when
   our lives felt safe and ordered. Clay Routledge, a psychologist and
   nostalgia researcher at North Dakota State University, explained,
   “You’re affirming the self—’I’ve done great things’—which is presumably
   predictive of the future. ‘I might be uncertain right now, but just
   look at my past. I’m a likeable person. I’m destined for great things.’
   ”

   To illuminate nostalgia’s role as an emotional buffer, Routledge and
   other researchers attempted to destabilize their subjects’ sense of
   self. Participants took tests that could be collectively characterized
   as psychologically diabolical: performing math in public, reading an
   essay designed to provoke existential angst, and being told that their
   answers on a personality survey indicated they would likely end up
   alone and unloved. In some of the experiments, the subjects who’d been
   made to feel insignificant or destined for abandonment reported feeling
   significantly more nostalgic than those who hadn’t. In other studies,
   participants were prompted to evoke either a nostalgic memory or an
   ordinary event, before or just after having their sense of self
   assailed. The subjects who indulged in a nostalgic reminiscence
   reported feeling significantly less stressed, less defensive, more
   socially supported and content, and more optimistic than their
   non-nostalgic counterparts.

   That nostalgia could be a source of mental resilience and motivation
   directly challenges certain critics’ notion of the sentiment as
   paralyzing, a harbinger of cultural stagnation. “It’s exactly the
   opposite,” Constantine Sedikides, a psychologist and nostalgia expert
   at the University of Southampton, said. “When you become nostalgic, you
   don’t become past-oriented. You want to go out there and do things.”

   If there is a poster population for nostalgia’s self-regulatory
   effects, it is China’s post-eighties cohort. As the nation’s first
   generation of only children—China instituted its one-child policy in
   1979—the post-eighties are predisposed to loneliness. They came of age
   in tandem with China’s transition to a more market-based economy, a
   fateful stroke of timing through which they were enlisted as
   involuntary trailblazers, tasked with defining what it means to be both
   modern and Chinese. While their parents received state-appointed
   factory jobs and government-subsidized housing, they were encouraged to
   pursue their dreams amidst a fluctuating social structure with few
   defined paths. Studying hard and making top grades became a
   generational cornerstone; academic diligence, it was understood, would
   lead to a more fulfilling professional life, and greater wealth. But
   the emphasis on education has produced more university graduates than
   positions with which to employ them. (A 2011 survey cited unemployment
   among college degree-holders aged twenty-one to twenty-five at just
   over sixteen per cent. Nearly seven million new graduates are expected
   this year.)

   Now in their late twenties or early thirties, the post-eighties are
   trying to navigate a desolate job market, often as the sole financial
   providers for both their children and their parents (as is China’s
   custom). Many left their rural hometowns for the more prosperous cities
   only to face vicious competition for scarce white-collar jobs. To vie
   for scant promotions, they work eleven-hour days and engage in brutal
   office politics. Housing costs are out of reach for most, with the
   real-estate price-to-income ratio in cities like Shanghai and Beijing
   as high as twenty-three to one, yet post-eighties men are under
   tremendous pressure to own a home before they propose marriage. Add to
   all of this urban overcrowding, unprecedented pollution, and a barrage
   of food-safety scandals (in the last six months alone, there have been
   rumors of anthrax in beef, rat meat sold as lamb, chicken laced with
   unsafe levels of antibiotics, thousands of dead pigs found in a river
   that supplies Shanghai’s water, and the discovery that the country’s
   bottled water may be as bad or worse than its tap water), and the
   resulting stress presents an onslaught of nostalgia’s known
   psychological triggers. Xinyue Zhou, a psychologist at Sun Yat-sen
   University, in Guangzhou, whose research has demonstrated nostalgia’s
   ability to bolster a sense of social connectedness among a diverse
   cross-section of Chinese citizens, said, “The uncertainty, the lack of
   control over our lives, is most unbearable to the post-eighties, so we
   have to seek confirmation from the past.”

   Marketers have been eager to capitalize on the post-eighties’ newly
   materialistic longing: Chevrolet and Hewlett-Packard launched nostalgic
   campaigns in recent years, while national brands, such as Huili Warrior
   sneakers, Forever bikes, and Jianlibao soda, have taken the opportunity
   to revive old products. According to Mary Bergstrom, the founder of the
   Bergstrom Group, a Shanghai-based consulting firm, and the author of
   “All Eyes East: Lessons from the Front Lines of Marketing to China’s
   Youth,” the most successful nostalgic ads and goods don’t just offer
   temporary relief within a safe moment of the past, they are also
   relevant to the post-eighties’ present reality and their hope for the
   future—a detail that underscores researchers’ findings that nostalgia
   can mitigate psychological slights and promote optimism.

   China’s young adults aren’t the only ones reeling from the country’s
   dramatic social shifts. Rampant health and safety issues, as well as
   the general transition from a more community-focussed culture to one
   that values individual wealth, have people of all ages yearning for a
   simpler, more trustworthy time. But the post-eighties, as the first
   generation to come of age in a China with global consumerism, popular
   culture, and technology, have, by far, the most universal cultural
   references through which to express their nostalgia. An emblematic
   example is the generation’s rekindled obsession with Transformers, a
   toy line and cartoon, introduced in 1984, about robots that morph into
   powerful machines in pursuit of good or evil. In July, 2007, the
   American film “The Transformers” opened in China, becoming the
   country’s second-highest-grossing foreign film at the time, and
   sparking a resurgence in the toy’s popularity.

   Back at the classroom restaurant in Beijing, a Transformers robot was
   featured prominently on a shelf strewn with colorful eighties-era toys.
   At a nearby table-desk, twenty-nine-year-old Jing Liu was laughing over
   beers with some of her actual former classmates. “Coming here makes us
   feel like we are back at the age when we didn’t have any pressure on
   us, just happily going to school every day,” she said. Just then, the
   staff handed out copies of an instantly recognizable first-grade
   English primer, and a young man volunteered to read aloud. A hush fell
   over his fellow diners, who turned to the appropriate page to follow
   along.

   Amanda R. Martinez, a science journalist and playwright, is writing a
   book on the global phenomenon of nostalgia.

   Photograph by CQSB/ChinaFotoPress/Getty

   More:ElementsNostalgiatechpages

The Daily

   The best of The New Yorker, every day, in your in-box, plus occasional
   alerts when we publish major stories.
   E-mail address
   ____________________
   (BUTTON) Sign up

   By signing up, you agree to our User Agreement and Privacy Policy &amp;
   Cookie Statement.
   Read More
   Mazoltuv Borukhova and Mikhail Mallayev in Queens Supreme Court
   a-reporter-at-large
   Iphigenia in Forest Hills
   Anatomy of a murder trial.

   By Janet Malcolm
   Lyndon Johnson and John F. Kennedy walking out of a hotel
   annals-of-history
   The Day L.B.J. Took Charge
   Lyndon Johnson and the events in Dallas.

   By Robert A. Caro
   Painting of a woman wearing a red shirt
   a-reporter-at-large
   A Loaded Gun
   A mass shooter’s tragic past.

   By Patrick Radden Keefe
   Twenty-seven years after a friend’s murder, Andy Rosenzweig found
   himself revisiting the scene of the crime.
   annals-of-crime
   A Cold Case
   Suddenly, a New York cop remembered a long-ago murder.

   By Philip Gourevitch

   The New Yorker

   (BUTTON) Sections
     * News
     * Books &amp; Culture
     * Fiction &amp; Poetry
     * Humor &amp; Cartoons
     * Magazine
     * Crossword
     * Video
     * Podcasts
     * Archive
     * Goings On

   (BUTTON) More
     * Customer Care
     * Shop The New Yorker
     * Buy Covers and Cartoons
     * Condé Nast Store
     * Digital Access
     * Newsletters
     * Jigsaw Puzzle
     * RSS

     * About
     * Careers
     * Contact
     * F.A.Q.
     * Media Kit
     * Press
     * Accessibility Help
     * Condé Nast Spotlight

   © 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes
   acceptance of our User Agreement and Privacy Policy and Cookie
   Statement and Your California Privacy Rights. The New Yorker may earn a
   portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as
   part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this
   site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or
   otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
   Ad Choices
     *
     *
     *
     *
     *

   (BUTTON) Do Not Sell My Personal Info
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-42">
<text>
   #RSS Feed

   [tr?id=1970632603180520&amp;ev=PageView&amp;noscript=1]

   CATALYST AGENTS
   (BUTTON)

   Home Our Services Portfolio (BUTTON) About

   (BUTTON) Resources Blog CAREERS Contact Us
   (BUTTON) Back Who We Are Our Values Our Responsibility Our Vision Our
   Team
   (BUTTON) Back Little Red Book Tutorials Chinese Social Media Tutorials
   WeChat Marketing Mastery Course The Cultural Marketer Podcast Clubhouse
   - China Marketing Club
   (BUTTON)

   ____________________ (BUTTON)

   HomeOur ServicesPortfolio About Who We Are Our Values Our
   Responsibility Our Vision Our Team
   CATALYST AGENTS

   Resources Little Red Book Tutorials Chinese Social Media Tutorials
   WeChat Marketing Mastery Course The Cultural Marketer Podcast Clubhouse
   - China Marketing Club BlogCAREERSContact Us

Chinese Consumer Trends: Nostalgia’s Role in Consumerism

   Have you ever listened to music you haven’t heard for a long time and
   started reminiscing about the good old times? Were there any toys you
   wanted but couldn’t get when you were a child? Were there any anime or
   shows that you loved watching during your childhood? Ahhh...memories..
   Nostalgia marketing is so successful because brands can quickly and
   deeply connect with audiences by revisiting pleasant memories. Research
   shows that the brain’s feel-good chemicals, dopamine, serotonin, and
   oxytocin, are activated at higher levels between the ages of 12 and 22,
   which is why we often feel a nostalgic yearning for items and
   experiences we encounter during our teenage and early adulthood years

   In our previous article and Instagram carousel, we already analyzed why
   Gen Z is a lucrative customer segment with the highest potential in
   China. Nostalgia marketing commonly targets millennials and Gen Zers,
   as they are now in the workforce of “Workism” societies saturated with
   highly educated and skilled workers. Although most of them are
   well-compensated at work, they are physically and mentally exhausted
   from working long hours and enduring the pressure and stress of immense
   competition. It is a social phenomenon that a lot of young adults have
   become desperate, sad, and lonely. When life lacks certainty and they
   feel they cannot set high expectations for the future, they tend to
   seek affirmation and happiness from the past.

   If you are a millennial, you are likely familiar with a lot of cartoons
   and anime like Space Jam, Doraemon, or movies from Ghibli studio.
   Millennials and Gen Zers in China love cute and cuddly things; they are
   obsessed with luxury items that incorporate childhood anime elements.
   “Shoppertainment” has also become a form of mental escapism for
   millennials and Gen Zers.

   But do you think their consumption is only confined to luxury bags,
   apparel, and shoes? It is much more than that. The younger generations
   have been exposed to multiple cultures, as they grew up during the
   golden era of digital transformations, watching different anime on TV
   and playing the latest gaming consoles. However, not all millennials
   and Gen Z could afford their childhood desires, this also shifts their
   consumption patterns on purchasing collectibles and toys that they
   could not get as a child. The chance to own an item we wanted as a kid
   allows us to satisfy our childhood wishes.

   There was a resurgence in the popularity of Pokemon cards worldwide in
   2020. During the pandemic lockdown, people stayed at home and thus had
   more time to reflect on their lives, doing things that they’d rarely do
   when they were already overwhelmed by daily responsibilities. We have
   all dreamt about time travel at some point as a kid, yet, is it
   possible for us to go back to our worry-free childhood? This desire to
   ‘feel like a child again’ drives us to revisit things that we used to
   be surrounded by in our childhood. You might watch your favorite
   childhood anime, dig out your time capsules holding all your childhood
   toys, or even spend a handsome amount of money to buy items they wanted
   as a child.. 77% of millennials and Gen Zers felt a desire to engage
   with comfortable content that gave them a break from the news, while
   73% reported that they spent money on collectible cards.

   A world-famous Youtube star who fought with Floyd Mayweather, Logan
   Paul, spent $2 million buying 6 Pokemon First Edition Base Set booster
   boxes which were released in 1999. 1 booster box contains 36 booster
   packs, each with 11 cards inside, for a total of 400 cards. He put 36
   of the unopened boosters packs for bidding via Goldin Auctions, and
   each pack was sold for $39,206 USD. The “Shadowless” Charizard with a
   “PSA 10 Gem Mint” rating was sold for $311,800 on eBay through PWCC
   auctions. Now, the “Shadowless” Charizard graded with PSA 10 has
   potentially reached $1M USD in value because there are only 3 in the
   world and Logan Paul wrapped it on his neck before his fight with
   Floyd, the card almost stole the show. Are you already going through
   the dusty sealed boxes in your basement? We won’t judge you. But the
   real question is: why is the old suddenly new again and worth so much
   more than before?
   logan-paul-charizard.jpg logan-paul-charizard.jpg
   43948329-9662563-image-a-43_1623116638341.jpg
   43948329-9662563-image-a-43_1623116638341.jpg
   logan-paul-vs-floyd-mayweather.jpg logan-paul-vs-floyd-mayweather.jpg

   Gary Vee, a world-famous serial entrepreneur who initiated the sports
   card hype, Pokemon cards, and collectibles, said: “After studying the
   card market for three years, I have this amazing feeling of conviction.
   All “cards”, especially the top 5% of vintage and rare cards, will go
   through a transformation similar to contemporary art’s transformation
   over the last half-century.” He also published quite a few YouTube
   videos preaching the lucrativeness and growth potential of sports
   cards. Most people collected cards as a kid but we grew out of it. But
   when social media power brokers like Gary Vee talked up trading cards,
   they have become culturally and socially relevant to most of us. Yet,
   is the endorsement of Gary Vee the direct causation of the white-hot
   card mania? Or do most of us have the desire for nostalgia deep inside
   our hearts?
   SportsCards_LinkedIn_3-700x700.png SportsCards_LinkedIn_3-700x700.png
   PastedGraphic-12.png PastedGraphic-12.png

   Nostalgia marketing is undeniably powerful. Burger King switched its
   logo to the brand used in the 90s this year.  People who are nostalgic
   tend to remember the good times and the personal meaning attached to
   these memories. With this logo switch, Burger King customers are
   prompted to remember the times they dated their high school crushes,
   where they shared the same burger and milkshake or the toys they
   received from the meal, rather than the burnt burger or cold fries they
   had.

   In China, Nostalgia marketing is also extremely effective on
   millennials and Gen Zers. The Chinese value collectivism, so as a
   culture, they tend to share collective memories and develop collective
   identities. When brands launch nostalgic marketing campaigns tailored
   for Chinese youth, the potential return is far greater than in
   individualistic societies. For instance, Scent Library collaborated
   with the iconic Chinese candy brand White Rabbit to create a distinct
   milky flavor fragrance. Chinese netizens were so excited about it, some
   even claimed the scent brought back some of their most cherished
   childhood memories.

   Now, we know nostalgia plays a crucial role in consumer behavior. Are
   you ready to tug at your audiences’ nostalgic heartstrings and take
   your brand to the next level? Send us an email at
   info@catalystagents.com or fill in the contact form below and let us
   help you get started.
   business, Business strategy, Chinese Marketing, Cultural Marketing,
   Instagram Marketing, Influencer Marketing, Little Red Book, Marketing
   Strategy, Online Marketing, Social Commerce, Social Media Marketing,
   Tiktok Marketing, Video MarketingGuest UserNovember 5, 2021nostalgia,
   nostalgia marketing, pokemon, logan paul, floyd mayweather,
   pokemoncards, charizard, Burger King, Gary Vee, NFT, Chinese Consumers,
   Chinese luxury market, China Retail Sales, Chinese economy, Chinese
   consumerism, Chinese Social Media, nostalgic brand logos
   Facebook0 Twitter LinkedIn0 Reddit Tumblr Pinterest0 0 Likes

   Previous

Spotify Digital Audio Ads Are On The Rise

   business, Business strategy, Cultural Marketing, entrepreneur, How To
   Guide, Social Commerce, Social Media Marketing, startup, Spotify Audio
   AdGuest UserDecember 14, 2021spotify, spotify ad, podcast,
   audiomarketing, spotifymusic
   Next

Could Virtual KOLs be a welcomed alternative to traditional Influencer
marketing?

   bilibili marketing, Bilibili, Business strategy, Chinese Marketing,
   Cultural Marketing, Little Red Book, Kuaishou, Influencer Marketing,
   RED Marketing, Redbook Marketing, Social Media Marketing, WeChat,
   WeChat Advertising, WeChat Marketing, Weibo Marketing, 小红书Guest
   UserOctober 21, 2021virtual kol, Chinese KOLs, Chinese luxury market,
   Chinese Social Media Marketing, Chinese Marketing Agency, China
   Marketing, China Retail Sales, Chinese Digital Marketing, Chinese
   Social Commerce, Chinese marketing, Chinese Influencers


   Artboard 2 copy 8.png Artboard 2 copy 8.png
   Artboard 2 copy 9.png Artboard 2 copy 9.png
   Artboard 2 copy 10.png Artboard 2 copy 10.png

   Catalyst Agents
   210 - 131 Water Street,
   Vancouver,
   Canada
   604-674-0389 info@catalystagents.com
   Hours
   Mon 9am - 5pm
   Tue 9am - 5pm
   Wed 9am - 5pm
   Thu 9am - 5pm
   Fri 9am - 5pm

   Catalyst Agents
   (FMC MARKETING SOLUTIONS INC.)

   Suite 210 - 131 Water Street, Vancouver, V6B 4M3
   604.674.0389


   Privacy Policy
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-43">
<text>
                                403 Forbidden
     __________________________________________________________________

                                    nginx
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-45">
<text>
   Back to Homepage
   Solutions
   Solutions
   Our SolutionVirtual ProgramsCare ManagementActivities
   Family EngagementDigital SignageEVVForm Builder
   Benefits
   Benefits
   For OwnersFor ManagersFor Care Staff
   For EnterpriseFor Clients &amp; Families
   About
   About
   Our StoryTestimonialsCase StudiesPartnersContact
   Who We Serve
   Activity DirectorsAdult Day CareChild DaycarePACE ProgramsAssisted
   LivingHome CareNursing HomesMemory CareLearning Disabilities
   Care HomesDementia CareHousing AssociationsSupported LivingIndependent
   LivingCCRC
   Pricing
   Resources
   Resources
   ReminiscenceImplementationContactBlogFAQsPress

   Book a demo

   Login

   Menu

   Solutions
   Our Solution
   Virtual Programs
   Care Management
   Activities
   Family Engagement
   Digital Signage
   EVV
   Form Builder
   Benefits
   For Owners
   For Managers
   For Care Staff
   For Enterprise
   For Clients &amp; Families
   About
   Pricing
   Our Story
   Testimonials
   Case Studies
   Partners
   Contact
   Who We Serve
   Activity Directors
   Adult Day Care
   PACE Programs
   Assisted Living
   Home Care
   Care Homes
   Dementia Care
   Housing Associations
   Supported Living
   Independent Living
   Nursing Homes
   Memory Care
   CCRC
   Learning Disabilities
   Resources
   Reminiscence
   Implementation
   Contact
   Blog
   FAQs
   Press

   Book a demoSign in

   5 Things To Get You Feeling Nostalgic
   StoriiCare
   view all posts

   Home
   Blog
   5 Things To Get You Feeling Nostalgic

5 Things To Get You Feeling Nostalgic

   Activity Ideas
   Dementia &amp; Memory Care
   Family Engagement
   Posted on
   June 18, 2020

   Quick Navigation

   Nostalgia is a powerful feeling. It provides us with a sense of
   happiness and sentimental longing when we think about a fond memory
   from our past. Often when we reflect on old memories it can boost our
   mood and reduce stress. It has been shown that feelings of nostalgia
   can also help people feel valued, loved and enhances perceptions of
   social support when people are feeling lonely.

Listen To Old Music

   Listening to music from your childhood can often take you back to a
   time of your youth. It could be a song from your favourite movie,
   musical or even just a popular song during your school years.

   "Music evokes so many feelings in us, memories, nostalgia, things that
   are connected to our past"

   - Olga Kurylenko

   Music can reconnect us to a special moment in time - you may find
   yourself sinking into beloved memories and feeling 18 all over again!
   Many studies have shown that nostalgia can be used as a mood elevating
   technique; increasing levels of happiness and strengthening social
   bonds. A fun way to start a wave of nostalgia is by creating a playlist
   for life on Storii. Gather all of your old favourite songs that revive
   fond memories and categorise them on your Storii account. You also have
   the option to categorise your playlists by decade or by genre - it's
   entirely up to you. Our next blog post will take you through the steps
   of how to create a playlist on Storii, so stay tuned.

Look at Old Photographs

   Looking at old photos is another way to spark feelings of nostalgia.
   Photographs can often evoke emotions and allow you to relive your
   favourite moments. Retronaut is a great resource to find old historic
   photos which will allow you to reminisce by travelling back to a
   certain period in time. Alternatively, you can create your own life
   story and log your own thoughts, memories &amp; moments that matter on
   Storii. This article (here) will help you organise and digitise your
   old photographs to store them in one secure, easily accessible place.

Watch Old Movies

   Think back to your old DVD collection, which movies could you watch
   over and over again? A few of our favourites include Grease, Dirty
   Dancing and of course the Disney classics. Watching a movie from your
   childhood or even seeing an old TV commercial can certainly spark that
   feeling of nostalgia. The BBC's archive of TV nostalgia has some great
   TV programmes for you to have a look at for free that will certainly
   take you back.

Play An Old Fashioned Game

   This is a fun activity to enjoy with your family that will give you the
   opportunity to share your love of your favourite childhood games. You
   could try playing an old fashioned game that was popular before
   technology took over. A few examples of outdoor games include; Chinese
   jump rope, hopscotch, hula hooping, roller skating or even a game of
   rounders. However, if you are wanting to stay indoors some great
   suggestions are cards, noughts and crosses or hangman.

Visit Your Old Neighbourhood

   Having a drive or walk around your old neighbourhood will most likely
   stir some old emotions and memories of growing up. Have a look around
   the shops you used to visit and your favourite locations. Take in the
   details and observe how things have changed over the years.

What gets you feeling nostalgic? Comment below!

   Follow Us
   Facebook
   Linkedin
   Twitter
   Instagram

   tags
   Family
   Memory Care
   Reminiscence

   A home health worker shares a tablet with an elderly woman

Our newsletter

Get great curated articles every week.

   First Name ____________________
   Email Address ____________________
   Subscribe Now
   Thanks for subscribing!
   Oops! Something went wrong while submitting the form.

similar posts

You Might Also Like

   Back to all articles

Person-centered care: How can it be applied to adult day programs?

   Posted on
   October 3, 2022

A Beginner's Guide to Reminiscence Therapy and Why It's Important

   Posted on
   August 9, 2022

7 Creative Ways to Reduce Chronic Loneliness in Seniors

   Posted on
   July 27, 2022

See how StoriiCare can help connect your community!

   Book in a time that works for you by clicking the button below. A
   member of our team will be happy to give you a tour of the platform and
   answer any questions you may have.
   Book a demo

Get your personalized demo today

   Book a demo
   Newsletter
   Email address ____________________
   Subscribe
   Thanks for subscribing to our newsletter
   Oops! Something went wrong while submitting the form.
   Facebook
   LinkedinIn
   Twitter
   Instagram
   pages
   System StatusPressPartnersStoriiCareRecord Life StoriesGroup
   LoginFamily PortalBlogFind Adult Day CareAdult Day Forum
   Company
   Terms of ServicePrivacy PolicyAbout usContact
   Contact
   +1 650 924 9930+44 141 816 0373+61 3 7035 7936team@storii.com
   Offices
   StoriiCare
   210 S Ellsworth Ave, #317
   San Mateo, CA
   94401
   StoriiCare
   101 Rose Street South Lane
   Edinburgh
   EH2 3JG
   Copyright © 2022 Storii, Inc. All rights reserved.

   We track sessions with cookies
   For what?

   Got it!
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-46">
<text>
   IFRAME: https://gtm-server.healthline.com/ns.html?id=GTM-MB6365D

     * Conditions
          + Featured
               o Addictions
               o Anxiety Disorder
               o ADHD
               o Bipolar Disorder
               o Depression
               o PTSD
               o Schizophrenia
          + Articles
               o Adjustment Disorder
               o Agoraphobia
               o Antisocial Personality Disorder
               o Borderline Personality Disorder
               o Childhood ADHD
               o Dissociative Identity Disorder
               o Narcissistic Personality Disorder
               o Narcolepsy
               o Oppositional Defiant Disorder
               o Panic Attack
               o Postpartum Depression
               o Schizoaffective Disorder
               o Seasonal Affective Disorder
               o Sex Addiction
               o Social Anxiety
               o Specific Phobias
               o Teenage Depression
               o Trauma
     * Discover
          + Wellness Topics
               o Black Mental Health
               o Grief
               o Emotional Health
               o Sex &amp; Relationships
               o Trauma
               o Understanding Therapy
               o Workplace Mental Health
          + Original Series
               o My Life with OCD
               o Caregivers Chronicles
               o Empathy at Work
               o Sex, Love &amp; All of the Above
               o Parent Central
               o Mindful Moment
          + News &amp; Events
               o Mental Health News
               o COVID-19
               o Live Town Hall: Mental Health in Focus
          + Podcasts
               o Inside Mental Health
               o Inside Schizophrenia
               o Inside Bipolar
     * Quizzes
          + Conditions
               o ADHD Symptoms Quiz
               o Anxiety Symptoms Quiz
               o Autism Quiz: Family &amp; Friends
               o Autism Symptoms Quiz
               o Bipolar Disorder Quiz
               o Borderline Personality Test
               o Childhood ADHD Quiz
               o Depression Symptoms Quiz
               o Eating Disorder Quiz
               o Narcissim Symptoms Test
               o OCD Symptoms Quiz
               o Psychopathy Test
               o PTSD Symptoms Quiz
               o Schizophrenia Quiz
          + Lifestyle
               o Attachment Style Quiz
               o Career Test
               o Do I Need Therapy Quiz?
               o Domestic Violence Screening Quiz
               o Emotional Type Quiz
               o Loneliness Quiz
               o Parenting Style Quiz
               o Personality Test
               o Relationship Quiz
               o Stress Test
               o What's Your Sleep Like?
     * Resources
          + Treatment &amp; Support
               o Find Support
               o Suicide Prevention
               o Drugs &amp; Medications
               o Find a Therapist

   (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON) Conditions
     * (BUTTON) Discover
     * (BUTTON) Quizzes
     * (BUTTON) Resources

   (BUTTON) Subscribe
   (BUTTON)

The Benefits of Nostalgia

   Medically reviewed by Scientific Advisory Board — By John DiPrete on
   September 16, 2018

   If unpleasant or obsessional, past memories can hurt — but nostalgia is
   good for you. The benefits of this internal psychological state are
   touted in various academic studies exploring the art and practice of
   what could be deemed as “pleasant reminiscing.“

   According to experts, personal memories from long ago of family and
   friends can link us together in shared comforts of tradition, and also
   lend a gratifying sense of continuity in our lives.

   Nostalgia can take on many different forms. Watching an old
   black-and-white movie can trigger a cultural nostalgia for a lost
   period in time. Often that longing can predate one’s own date of birth:
   fondness for a time only your parents may have known and talked about.

   The mental journey back through time adds a fourth dimension to the
   present. If mindfulness is the focal point of the Eternal Now,
   nostalgia forms a special continuum to the timeless past, expanding our
   concept of the self. The future may be vague, inchoate and
   unpredictable; but the past represents a finished whole that cannot be
   harmed or tampered with.

   Documented reasons why nostalgia (when used intelligently) can be good
   for us:

   It allows us to cast off the stresses of modern life by traveling back
   to a period of our own choosing. It’s like escaping into the confines
   of a good book or a darkened theater, but in this case the story is
   real and (if chosen wisely) has been assured a happy ending.

   Especially for the elderly, frequently isolated from loved ones and
   familiar surroundings, recapturing the past often results in
   maintaining a positive outlook and leads to purposeful activities, such
   as telling stories and sharing wisdom from a bygone time.

   According to Dena Kemmet, “an additional function of nostalgia may be
   its motivating potential. Nostalgia may boost optimism, spark
   inspiration, and foster creativity.”

   According to Dr. Clay Routledge, Social Psychologist and Associate
   Professor of Psychology at North Dakota State University,nostalgia
   “increases positive mood, self-esteem, feelings of social
   connectedness, optimism about the future, and perceptions of meaning in
   life. Furthermore, nostalgia motivates people to focus on cultivating
   meaningful relationships and pursue important life goals. In addition,
   as people get older, nostalgia makes them feel youthful and energetic.
   Nostalgia also reduces existential fears about death.”

   The emotion of nostalgia can be evoked from a familiar scent, an old
   photograph, or a cherished song. Often it occurs during periods of
   sadness or transition, but it can appear anytime — affecting the young
   as well as old. Even children as young as eight-years-old can
   experience the wistfulness of times past.

   How nostalgic are you? The research of Krystine Batcho has led New
   Scientist to create a quiz on the subject, to determine one‘s degree of
   wistful thinking. A high score indicates a person more attuned to life
   and more adaptable to life‘s vicissitudes.

   The healthy use of nostalgia is not about retreating into the past. On
   the contrary, exploring the treasures of our “mental” time capsules can
   propel us toward the future, with a restored sense of enthusiasm and
   hope. The regular practice of this discipline has been found to be
   correlated with increased resilience and self-confidence.

   For some, nostalgia can come to resemble a spiritual meditation.
   Indeed, the past is more venerated in places where the future is more
   fleeting — where constant change is often expected and demanded. The
   “cushion” against future shock rests on the pillow of slow
   self-reflection. Such a spirit of languid repose opposes the current
   epoch, a time when the present is rooted in gross speed and frequent
   turmoil.

   The judicious use of nostalgia offers each one of us who feels stranded
   in the present an anchor to the past.

   Last medically reviewed on September 16, 2018
   FEEDBACK:
   Medically reviewed by Scientific Advisory Board — By John DiPrete on
   September 16, 2018

Read this next

     * How to Move Past Regret
       Regret is a common feeling, but knowing how to move past and
       learning from regrets can help you live a better life.
       READ MORE
     *
     * What Are Common Symptoms of Dyslexia?
       Medically reviewed by Joslyn Jelinek, LCSW
       Dyslexia is a learning disorder that can make reading and writing
       more challenging.
       READ MORE
     * 6 Ways to Live an Authentic Life
       Medically reviewed by Kendra Kubala, PsyD
       Living authentically means you focus on being yourself and not a
       version that others expect. Authentic living can improve your
       mental health and self-
       READ MORE
     * Why Change Is the Only Constant and How to Embrace It
       Medically reviewed by Marney White, PhD, MS
       Change often requires you to come out from a zone of comfort and
       security. If you experience difficulty adapting to change, remember
       that you're not…
       READ MORE
     * What Is the Grey Rock Method and Is It Effective?
       The grey rock method is where you act unresponsive to protect
       yourself from abuse. We look at how to do this safely.
       READ MORE
     * Burnout Test: Am I Burned Out?
       Medically reviewed by Danielle Wade, LCSW
       This quiz aims to help you identify the common signs of burnout so
       you can know if you're experiencing stress, burnout, or something
       else.
       READ MORE
     * Can You Recover from Dissociative Identity Disorder?
       Medically reviewed by Kendra Kubala, PsyD
       There is no absolute cure for DID, but therapy and other treatments
       can reduce your symptoms and improve your quality of life.
       READ MORE
     * What Are the Physical Symptoms of Grief?
       Medically reviewed by Debra Rose Wilson, PhD, MSN, RN, IBCLC,
       AHN-BC, CHT
       Grief can cause physical symptoms such as exhaustion and
       inflammation and can lead to conditions such as diabetes and heart
       disease. Learn more about…
       READ MORE
     * 5 Ways to Practice Gratitude When You Don't Feel Grateful
       Expressing gratitude when you're experiencing challenging
       situations can be difficult. But practicing gratitude can
       strengthen relationships and your…
       READ MORE
     * What Is Emotional Dysregulation?
       Medically reviewed by Joslyn Jelinek, LCSW
       Finding it hard to control your emotions? Emotional dysregulation
       has many causes, including past trauma and mental health
       conditions.
       READ MORE

     * About Us
     * Contact Us
     * Terms of Use
     * Privacy policy
     * Privacy Settings
     * Advertising Policy

     * Medical Affairs
     * Content Integrity
     * Newsletter
     * Find a Therapist
     * © 2005-2022 Psych Central a Red Ventures Company. All rights
       reserved. Our website services, content, and products are for
       informational purposes only. Psych Central does not provide medical
       advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information.

   © 2005-2022 Psych Central a Red Ventures Company. All rights reserved.
   Our website services, content, and products are for informational
   purposes only. Psych Central does not provide medical advice,
   diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information.
   AboutCareersAdvertise with us

   OUR BRANDS
   HealthlineMedical News TodayGreatistPsych Central
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-47">
<text>
   Harvard Business Review Home
   Subscribe Cart Sign In
   ____________________ ____________________ (BUTTON) Search CLEAR
     *
     *
     *
     *
     *
     *
     * SUGGESTED TOPICS
     *
     *
     *

   Explore HBR
     * Diversity
     * Latest
     * The Magazine
     * Ascend
     * Most Popular
     * Podcasts
     * Video
     * Store
     * Webinars
     * Newsletters

   Popular Topics
     * Managing Yourself
     * Leadership
     * Strategy
     * Managing Teams
     * Gender
     * Innovation
     * Work-life Balance
     * All Topics

   For Subscribers
     * The Big Idea
     * Data &amp; Visuals
     * Reading Lists
     * Case Selections
     * HBR Learning
     * Subscribe

   My Account
     * My Library
     * Topic Feeds
     * Orders
     * Account Settings
     * Email Preferences
     * Log Out
     * Sign In

     *
     *
     *
     *

   Subscribe Diversity Latest Podcasts Video The Magazine Ascend Store
   Webinars Newsletters All Topics The Big Idea Data &amp; Visuals Reading
   Lists Case Selections HBR Learning My Library Account Settings Log Out
   Sign In

Your Cart

   Your Shopping Cart is empty.
   Visit Our Store
   Guest User
   Subscriber
   My Library Topic Feeds Orders Account Settings Email Preferences Log
   Out
   Reading List
   Reading Lists

   You have 1 free articles left this month.
   You are reading your last free article for this month.
   Subscribe for unlimited access.
   Create an account to read 2 more.

   [HBR_logo_black.svg]
   Collaboration and teams

The Surprising Power of Nostalgia at Work

   It can deepen relationships, foster creativity, and boost a collective
   sense of purpose.
   by
     * Clay Routledge

   by
     * Clay Routledge

   April 26, 2021
   [Apr21_24_1262289558.jpg]
   Iryna Veklich/Getty Images
     * Tweet
     * Post
     * Share
     *
     * Save
     * Get PDF
     * Buy Copies
     * Print

   Summary.

   Nostalgia is an important psychological resource that helps individuals
   cope with life’s stressors, build strong relationships, find and
   maintain meaning in life, and become more creative and inspired. By
   understanding how nostalgia works, managers can utilize its power to
   help their organizations thrive. The author presents three reasons to
   do so. First, it brings the social self online by increasing social
   agency and directing that agency toward helping others and
   strengthening social and group bonds. Second, it can reduce turnover by
   helping work feel meaningful — especially for employees who are burned
   out. Third, because nostalgia makes people feel socially supported,
   energized, and confident, it can help employees feel more creative and
   inspired.
     * Tweet
     * Post
     * Share
     *
     * Save
     * Get PDF
     * Buy Copies
     * Print

   Leer en español
   Ler em português

   Many people assume that nostalgia is purely entertainment, a feeling
   individuals enjoy because it takes them back to the more carefree days
   of their youth. Some view it as maladaptive fixation on the past,
   perhaps indicating a fear of change. I’ve heard business analysts and
   leaders argue that, although nostalgia may help some companies sell
   consumers a range of products, it’s ultimately bad for business and the
   economy. They imagine that by keeping people focused on the past,
   nostalgia undermines innovation, creativity, and ultimately progress.

   From that perspective, there’s little reason for managers to view
   nostalgia as having value within their organizations. However, a
   growing body of research reveals that it’s an important psychological
   resource that helps individuals cope with life’s stressors, build
   strong relationships, find and maintain meaning in life, and become
   more creative and inspired. I’ve been conducting research on the
   psychology of nostalgia for almost 20 years. Based on what I’ve
   learned, I believe managers can use the power of nostalgia to help
   their organizations thrive.

Nostalgia Is a Psychological Resource

   First, managers need to understand how nostalgia actually works. When
   people engage in nostalgia, they’re accessing personally meaningful
   autobiographical events typically shared with family, friends, and
   other close connections. It isn’t just a happy trip down memory lane —
   in fact, nostalgic reflection often involves both negative and positive
   emotional states. Critically, it tends to follow a redemptive sequence
   in which negative feelings such as longing and loss give way to
   positive feelings such as happiness, social connectedness, gratitude,
   and hope. In other words, nostalgia is bittersweet, but more sweet than
   bitter.

   Nostalgia can be triggered by explicit reminders of the past, such as
   running into an old friend or hearing music from one’s youth, but
   people also often become nostalgic when they’re feeling down or
   distressed in some way. Common psychological triggers of nostalgia
   include feelings of sadness, loneliness, meaninglessness, uncertainty,
   and boredom.

   These negative psychological states increase nostalgia because
   nostalgia is restorative. After conducting dozens of studies using
   diverse methods ranging from qualitative text analysis, self-report
   surveys, and behavioral and neuroscientific experiments, my colleagues
   and I have concluded that nostalgia is best described as a
   self-regulatory existential resource that people naturally and
   frequently use to navigate stress and uncertainty and find the
   motivation needed to move forward with purpose and focus. The impact of
   nostalgia on meaning is particularly important because meaning in life
   has great motivational power. Research finds that nostalgia motivates
   the pursuit of important life goals by increasing that sense of
   meaning.

   Humans are an existential species. To flourish, we need to make
   meaningful social connections and feel like we’re contributing to the
   world in a way that matters. Nostalgia serves these existential
   endeavors. Here are three reasons for managers to bring this adaptive
   feature of human psychology into their organizations — and ways to do
   it.

1. Nostalgia can help build strong relationships and teams

   Social bonds are a central feature of nostalgia. Most nostalgic
   memories involve other people, and when individuals reflect on these
   memories, they feel more socially connected and supported. Managers can
   take advantage of nostalgia’s social nature to promote strong
   relationships and teams. Encouraging employees to share nostalgic
   stories with team members may help them build deeper connections
   because nostalgia orients people toward social goals. For example, in
   one set of studies my colleagues and I conducted, we found that having
   research participants spend a few minutes reflecting on a nostalgic
   memory (compared to an ordinary autobiographical memory, like grocery
   shopping or driving to work) increased their desire to pursue social
   goals such as forming deep relationships and made them more confident
   that they could successfully achieve those goals. They also became more
   confident that they could overcome social conflicts.

   We also observed that when people are experiencing higher levels of
   nostalgia, they’re more interested in working on tasks with others, and
   nostalgia has been shown to increase empathy for others and prosocial
   behavior in the forms of volunteering and charitable donations.
   Research also finds that, when people are part of a group, nostalgia
   for an event shared within it makes people more committed to the group.

   Nostalgia brings the social self online. It increases social agency and
   directs that agency toward helping others and strengthening social and
   group bonds. Given the importance of positive relationships and
   effective teams for both the health of individual employees and the
   organization, managers should explore ways to incorporate nostalgia
   into team-building activities, as well as social events like workplace
   celebrations and retreats. For example, create a retro music playlist
   by asking employees to submit nostalgia-themed song requests. This will
   give employees of different ages and with different experiences the
   opportunity to revisit their own nostalgic memories, which energizes
   the desire to connect with others. It will also inspire them to share
   these memories with others, which helps build deeper connections and
   increase nostalgia in others. Indeed, research finds that exposure to
   other people’s nostalgic memories increases one’s own nostalgia and all
   the associated psychological benefits — in other words, nostalgia is
   contagious.

2. Nostalgia can help make work feel meaningful and reduce turnover

   As an existential resource, nostalgia helps people maintain and enhance
   meaning in the present — when they reflect on past meaningful
   experiences, they become motivated to prioritize meaning in the
   present. Managers can tap into this existential resource to help
   employees find meaning at work. This may be particularly useful for
   those experiencing burnout. A series of studies found that when workers
   were prompted to reflect on experiences within their organization that
   made them nostalgic (organizational nostalgia), they subsequently
   reported a greater sense of meaning at work and lower turnover
   intentions. These effects were most pronounced among employees
   reporting high levels of burnout.

   By encouraging employees to revisit meaningful memories created within
   the organization, managers can help the ones experiencing stress and
   burnout reconnect with what made their jobs meaningful in the past,
   which can provide guidance for how to restore meaning at work in the
   present. Developing organizational social rituals and traditions can
   help create organizational nostalgia in the first place — it’s an
   investment in the future. For example, organizations could hold monthly
   game nights, potluck dinners, movie screenings, book clubs, or other
   events that provide employees the opportunity to form meaningful social
   memories shared with other members of the organization. When an
   organization is undergoing major changes that cause anxiety,
   interpersonal conflict, or other negative experiences, organizational
   nostalgia may prove to be a vital resource.

3. Nostalgia can help organizations be more creative and inspired

   Managers looking to cultivate outside-the-box thinking can also take
   advantage of nostalgia. A workplace that encourages employees to both
   share nostalgic memories and make new ones with their coworkers primes
   the pump of creativity. People are more likely to feel comfortable
   taking risks and exploring new ideas when they feel socially supported,
   energized, and confident. Nostalgia generates these states and can thus
   offer a way to orient employees toward creative thinking and
   problem-solving.

   Across three studies, researchers found that having individuals spend
   several minutes writing about a nostalgic memory made them feel more
   open-minded and creative, and critically, made them produce more
   creative content (as judged by independent evaluators). In addition,
   our research shows that nostalgia makes people feel more inspired.

   While on the subject of creativity, it’s worth noting that there is no
   single right way of inducing nostalgia. Our studies as well as those
   conducted by other research teams have utilized diverse nostalgia
   prompts, such as having people write about a nostalgic memory, read
   accounts of other people’s nostalgic memories, read song lyrics that
   make them nostalgic, listen to nostalgic music, watch nostalgic music
   videos, look at old photographs, visit nostalgia-themed websites,
   create scrapbooks, and engage in activities using augmented reality
   technology.

   Managers should look for opportunities to introduce nostalgia in ways
   they believe will best fit their organizational environment and
   culture. What’s most important is that managers appreciate that
   meaningfully connecting the present to the past via nostalgia can help
   them and their employees have the mindset and motivation needed to
   productively work toward future-oriented individual and organizational
   goals.
   Read more on Collaboration and teams or related topics Managing people,
   Motivating people and Burnout
     * CR
       Clay Routledge is a leading expert in existential psychology, a
       professor of management at North Dakota State University, a faculty
       scholar at the Challey Institute for Global Innovation and Growth,
       and a senior research fellow at the Archbridge Institute.

     * Tweet
     * Post
     * Share
     *
     * Save
     * Get PDF
     * Buy Copies
     * Print

   Read more on Collaboration and teams or related topics Managing people,
   Motivating people and Burnout

Partner Center

   Diversity Latest Magazine Ascend Topics Podcasts Video Store The Big
   Idea Data &amp; Visuals Case Selections HBR Learning

   Harvard Business Review Home
   Subscribe

Explore HBR

     * The Latest
     * Most Popular
     * All Topics
     * Magazine Archive
     * The Big Idea
     * Reading Lists
     * Case Selections
     * Video
     * Podcasts
     * Webinars
     * Data &amp; Visuals
     * My Library
     * Newsletters
     * HBR Press
     * HBR Ascend

HBR Store

     * Article Reprints
     * Books
     * Cases
     * Collections
     * Magazine Issues
     * HBR Guide Series
     * HBR 20-Minute Managers
     * HBR Emotional Intelligence Series
     * HBR Must Reads
     * Tools

About HBR

     * Contact Us
     * Advertise with Us
     * Information for Booksellers/Retailers
     * Masthead
     * Global Editions
     * Media Inquiries
     * Guidelines for Authors
     * HBR Analytic Services
     * Copyright Permissions

Manage My Account

     * My Library
     * Topic Feeds
     * Orders
     * Account Settings
     * Email Preferences
     * Account FAQ
     * Help Center
     * Contact Customer Service

Follow HBR

     * Facebook
     * Twitter
     * LinkedIn
     * Instagram
     * Your Newsreader

   Harvard Business Publishing
     * About Us
     * Careers
     * Privacy Policy
     * Cookie Policy
     * Copyright Information
     * Trademark Policy

   Harvard Business Publishing:
     * Higher Education
     * Corporate Learning
     * Harvard Business Review
     * Harvard Business School

   Copyright ©   Harvard Business School Publishing. All rights reserved.
   Harvard Business Publishing is an affiliate of Harvard Business School.

   [p?c1=2&amp;c2=14457509&amp;cv=2.0&amp;cj=1]
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-48">
<text>
   #Thriveworks » Restorative vs. reflective nostalgia: Learn to spot the
   differences and combat memory distortions Comments Feed alternate
   alternate alternate

   IFRAME:
   data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAO
   w==

   Close

     Chat

   Need help? Give us a call 855-641-1379

   (BUTTON)
     * About us
          + About
          + Contact us
          + 380+ locations
          + Online therapy
          + Psychiatry/medication
          + TherapyLand
          + Pricing
          + Client resources
          + Careers
     * FAQ
     * Learn
          + Anxiety
          + Children's mental health
          + Depression
          + Grief &amp; loss
          + Life transition
          + Relationships
          + Self-care
          + Stress
          + See all topics
     * For business
     * Book a session
     * Log in

   [gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==]
   [home-icon.png] Learn Coping Skills, Mental Health Topics

Restorative vs. reflective nostalgia: Learn to spot the differences and
combat memory distortions

   Highlights
   [gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==]
   [arrow-up.png]
   [gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==]
   [arrow-down.png]
     * Nostalgia is a familiar feeling, but there are actually two
       different types—reflective and restorative nostalgia.
     * Restorative nostalgia involves happy memories and associations with
       the past. When we feel restoratively nostalgic, we’re likely to
       feel motivated to seek out new and rewarding experiences.
     * Conversely, reflective nostalgia may often make us feel gloomy and
       disappointed, making it seem that the present moment doesn’t
       compare with our memories, preventing us from moving forward and
       making new positive experiences.
     * Though they might sound like polar opposites, both types of
       nostalgia can be empowering experiences, if we learn to harness
       their emotional power.
     * Feeling reflectively nostalgic can be counteracted by remembering
       that the present moment holds hope for us—we can make new friends,
       happy memories, or achieve success with a positive mindset.
     * Feeling restoratively nostalgic is a special sensation, one that we
       can treasure while still remembering that the grass always appears
       greener on the other side.

   Has an old photo, song, or smell ever resurfaced and brought distant
   memories surging back to you? The psychological rush of remembering
   days gone by has a bittersweet quality, one that can be difficult to
   express. We’ve all felt nostalgic, but we may not be as familiar with
   the two types of nostalgia: restorative and reflective. While
   restorative nostalgia makes us feel positive about our past and
   motivates us to seek out new possibilities and experiences, reflective
   nostalgia often leaves us upset and wistful, thinking that our best
   days are behind us.

   When we feel positive about memories from our past, studies indicate
   that our brains are rewarding or even bribing us into seeking out
   positive experiences in order to keep the good vibes flowing. In
   contrast, feelings of reflective nostalgia cause us to shut ourselves
   off to new possibilities; in this state of mind, we might actually be
   susceptible to developing depression or anxiety. Despite the
   drastically different ways that restorative and reflective nostalgia
   affect us, psychologists now know that our ability to recall past
   events isn’t very accurate. Most memories, good or bad (and especially
   those attached to strong emotions), are almost always distorted in some
   way.

   But as long as we don’t turn our backs on the present moment, or give
   up on the future, there’s nothing wrong with taking a restoratively
   nostalgic walk down memory lane. In fact, it could help set us up for
   success in our personal lives and prompt us to continually form healthy
   habits and relationships. The only thing to remember? The view in
   hindsight, whatever we see, isn’t real.
   white-and-green-wooden-house-miniature
   white-and-green-wooden-house-miniature

Reflective vs. Restorative Nostalgia

   Reflective nostalgia was first described in the 17th century when Swiss
   physician Dr. Johannes Hofer noted that soldiers who were stationed
   abroad would often long for their home country, experiencing a
   dejectedness that sometimes resulted in near depressive-like symptoms.
   Though not clearly understood at that time, the profound emotional
   effect of their memories could not be mistaken.

   When the past is viewed through the lens of reflective nostalgia, we’re
   typically closed off to the possibility of change and are reflecting
   back on old memories in order to seek refuge. We don’t see potential in
   the present moment because we’re overtaken by how much we miss the
   past. It’s common to feel reflectively nostalgic when:
     * Going through a breakup, divorce, or loss of a friendship
     * Grieving the death of a loved one
     * Experiencing failure, personally or professionally
     * Struggling with depression, anxiety, or other mental health
       conditions

   When the past is analyzed with rose-tinted glasses, we miss the whole
   picture. We forget the toiling, frustration, and dissonance involved
   with many of our memories, which can feel blissful in an illusory way.
   People may feel restoratively nostalgic when:
     * Celebrating an anniversary in a relationship, or getting together
       during the holidays
     * They wish to ignore certain aspects of the past
     * Achieving success in their personal or professional lives

   Regardless of whether you’re experiencing reflective or restorative
   nostalgia, it’s important to recognize and harness the emotional power
   of these unique psychological experiences. You can clear the haze
   associated with memory distortions from your train of thought by taking
   a moment to recognize how you feel about the memory in question.

How to Cope with Reflective Nostalgic Memories

   If you’re reflectively experiencing nostalgic memories, it’s prudent
   to:
     * Mentally pump the brakes before spiraling downward—but not too
       quickly. When a sour emotion surfaces while you’re reminiscing,
       you’re better off critically evaluating that memory. You might’ve
       made a mistake, said something disastrous, or been selfish. Perhaps
       the person you lost, the opportunity you missed, or the
       breakthrough moment that never came seems to be holding you
       underwater. Keep in mind, the situation probably wasn’t as bad as
       you remember it being.
     * Trust that there will be more chances to connect and prove
       yourself. The question is whether or not you’re open to new
       possibilities. Although most nostalgic memories are seen through
       rose-colored glasses, they’re an important way to remember that
       there are positive people and opportunities for us to yet
       experience. After all, the past is proof.
     * Consider whether it’s time to make new friends, find a new partner,
       or rekindle an old passion. If we want something that we used to
       have, we’ll need to work for it—and we have to accept that we’ll
       encounter at least some resistance in our efforts.

   Unlike restorative nostalgia, sensations of reflective nostalgia aren’t
   pleasant. Evaluate whether your negative emotions could be attached to
   an underlying mental health condition. Reflecting too long on adversity
   or negative experiences we’ve had can negatively affect our mental
   health. A therapist or counselor might be able to help you identify
   harmful thoughts or associations that may be clouding your view of the
   past.

How to Harness Restorative Nostalgic Memories

   When you feel the rush of restorative nostalgia, try to:
     * Soak it all in, but don’t dwell in the past for too long. If you’re
       thinking about lost friends, an old relationship, or a breakthrough
       career moment, the good times you’re remembering can be a
       motivating way to continue pushing forward, especially when life
       may seem to remove many relationships and opportunities from our
       lives over time.
     * Remind yourself that the best optimists are also realists.
       Adversity is an aspect of reality we often have to contend with.
       Just because what you’re able to recall seems amazing doesn’t mean
       that it’s an accurate depiction of that relationship, event, or
       opportunity. There were bad aspects, unique setbacks, and
       challenges attached to whatever you remember. Don’t make rash
       decisions based on nostalgic memories—there’s no going back.
     * Note that you could be exaggerating how “great” things were.
       Looking back might feel good and cast those positive social
       interactions, achievements, or settings in a golden light. This is
       great, but the present moment is all we have. Does your current
       life contain the things that you’re reminiscing about? Why or why
       not? Pondering this may reveal what and who makes us happy, as
       unique individuals.

   Feeling nostalgic can be an empowering experience or an overpowering
   wave. Yet if we slow down enough to process properly, we can take
   advantage of both reflective and restorative nostalgic moments. The
   biggest difference between these two psychological phenomena is how
   radically different they each affect our emotions. When those old
   memories come barrelling towards us, we can use them as our fuel—or
   succumb to viewing them as our failures.
   Jason Crosby Jason Crosby
   Written by
   Jason Crosby
   Published Nov 24, 2021, 6 min read.
   Fact-checked Why trust Thriveworks?
   What does "fact-checked" mean?
   (BUTTON) ×

   We only use authoritative, trusted, and current sources. In addition,
   we get information straight from our clinical and medical experts who
   also verify the overall accuracy of our content. This ensures we
   provide valuable resources to our readers. Read our editorial policy
   for more information.
   (BUTTON) Close
   Why you can trust Thriveworks
   (BUTTON) ×

   Thriveworks was established in 2008, with the ultimate mission of
   helping people live happy and successful lives. In addition to
   providing exceptional clinical care and customer service, we accomplish
   our mission by offering important information about mental health and
   self-improvement.

   We are dedicated to providing you with valuable resources that educate
   and empower you to live better. First, we research extensively,
   referring to and referencing authoritative sources that provide
   additional value. In addition, we meet with our clinical experts to
   better understand and gather information about a topic before and while
   writing.

   We also enforce a tiered review process in which at least three
   individuals — one or more being licensed clinical experts — review,
   edit, and approve each piece of content before it is published.
   Finally, we frequently update old content to reflect the most
   up-to-date information.
   (BUTTON) Close
   Recent articles

   Person sitting on a bench with hands in their hair Person sitting on a
   bench with hands in their hair

   What are unhealthy coping mechanisms, and how do they affect me?

   Woman in orange t-shirt watching the sunset while holding up a heart
   with two hands Woman in orange t-shirt watching the sunset while
   holding up a heart with two hands

   Healthy coping mechanisms and strategies: Behaviors that can set you up
   for success

   thoughtful-young-ethnic-women-having-conversation-at-table-at-home
   thoughtful-young-ethnic-women-having-conversation-at-table-at-home

   How can I keep passive-aggressive behavior from affecting me?
   View all

   Want to talk to a therapist? We have over 2,000 providers across the US
   ready to help you in person or online.
   Book a session 855-641-1379

     * Author

   Jason Crosby Jason Crosby

   Written by Jason Crosby

   Jason Crosby is a Senior Copywriter at Thriveworks. He received his BA
   in English Writing from Montana State University with a minor in
   English Literature. Previously, Jason was a freelance writer for
   publications based in Seattle, WA, and Austin, TX.

   Discover more
   ego healthy relationships human behavior long-term memory memory mental
   health

Are you struggling?

Thriveworks can help.

   Browse top-rated therapists near you, and find one who meets your
   needs. We accept most insurances, and offer weekend and evening
   sessions.
   Book a session 855-641-1379
   [gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==]
   [star-img.png]

   Rated 4.5 overall from 10,849 Google reviews
   Popular articles

   Woman holds illuminated umbrella under starry sky Woman holds
   illuminated umbrella under starry sky
   Healing abandonment issues: 5 pieces of advice that light the way
   Taylor Bennett
   5 min read

   Music Music
   Feeling flustered? Regain control by challenging your inner critic and
   finding your calm
   Taylor Bennett
   4 min read

   woman closing eyes with rainbow woman closing eyes with rainbow
   5 Ways to Deal with Temptation
   Taylor Bennett
   5 min read

   Grief Grief
   Humor can help you manage grief and cope with loss
   Taylor Bennett
   5 min read

   woman in yellow shirt hugging woman in blue shirt woman in yellow shirt
   hugging woman in blue shirt
   How to Deal With Painful Emotions: True Healing Requires True Feeling
   Taylor Bennett
   4 min read

   Life Is Unpredictable—Stay Calm Through the Chaos
   Taylor Bennett
   5 min read

   Writing and Thinking About Past Failures Reduces Stress and Enhances
   Future Performances
   Taylor Bennett
   4 min read

   Friends Friends
   When Life Knocks You Down, Implement These 6 Strategies
   Taylor Bennett
   4 min read

   Grief and the Loss of a Pet
   Selena Tyler, LPC
   5 min read

   What Are Defense Mechanisms?
   Taylor Bennett
   5 min read

   Combat Mental and Physical Exhaustion: Refocus Your Thoughts
   Taylor Bennett
   5 min read

   humor therapy - woman in city humor therapy - woman in city
   Humor helps with healing: Humor can help you cope with mental health
   issues
   Taylor Bennett
   3 min read

   No comments yet

   Disclaimer

   The information on this page is not intended to replace assistance,
   diagnosis, or treatment from a clinical or medical professional.
   Readers are urged to seek professional help if they are struggling with
   a mental health condition or another health concern.

   If you’re in a crisis, do not use this site. Please call the Suicide &amp;
   Crisis Lifeline at 988 or use these resources to get immediate help.

    1. Home

     Mental Health Topics

     Restorative vs. reflective nostalgia: Learn to spot the differences
   and combat memory distortions

   Follow us:
   (BUTTON) See all locations (BUTTON) Hide all locations

Join the movement — gain access to expert mental health tips and discussions,
delivered directly to your inbox.

     * Email Address
       ____________________

   Sign Me Up >gt;>gt;

   Δ
   _____________________________________________
   _____________________________________________
   _____________________________________________
   _____________________________________________
   _____________________________________________
   _____________________________________________
   _____________________________________________
   _____________________________________________

   IFRAME: gform_ajax_frame_24

Quick Links

     * Find A Counselor
     * Online Counseling
     * About Us
     * Free eBook
     * Counseling Jobs
     * Franchise
     * COVID-19 Response

How can we help you?

     * Addiction Counseling
     * Anger Management
     * Anxiety Counseling
     * Career Counseling
     * Child Therapy
     * CBT
     * Couples Counseling
     * Depression Counseling
     * Family Therapy
     * Grief Counseling
     * Life Coaching
     * Marriage Counseling
     * Online Psychiatry
     * Premarital Counseling
     * Psychologists
     * Trauma Therapy
     * View all Topics…

   © 2022 Thriveworks Counseling | Privacy Policy &amp; Terms of Use | Medical
   Records Request
   Thriveworks is currently working towards complete Accessibility of this
   website. If you have any questions, comments or concerns about this
   website please send us a message.
   Follow us:
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-49">
<text>
   #The Atlantic Best of The Atlantic

   Skip to content

Site Navigation

     *
     * (BUTTON)
       (BUTTON)
       PopularLatestNewsletters

Sections
          + Politics
          + Ideas
          + Fiction
          + Technology
          + Science
          + Photo
          + Business
          + Culture
          + Planet
          + Global
          + Books
          + Podcasts
          + Health
          + Education
          + Projects
          + Features
          + Family
          + Events
          + Shadowland
          + Progress
          + Newsletters
          + Explore The Atlantic Archive
          + Play The Atlantic crossword

The Print Edition
       Latest IssuePast Issues
         ______________________________________________________________

       Give a Gift
     * (BUTTON)
       Search The Atlantic
       (BUTTON) ____________________
       Quick Links
          + Dear Therapist
            Dear Therapist
          + Crossword Puzzle
            Crossword Puzzle
          + Magazine Archive
            Magazine Archive
          + Your Subscription
            Your Subscription
       (BUTTON)
     * Popular
     * Latest
     * Newsletters

     * Sign In
     * Subscribe

   Give a last-minute gift with a lasting impact.Give The Atlantic

   Technology

How the Internet Uses Nostalgia

   Long-lost memories pop up in music recommendations, personality
   quizzes, and ads. Why?


    By Megan Garber

   February 20, 2014
   (BUTTON) Share

   Vanilla Ice is selling Kraft macaroni and cheese now. The dudes of Full
   House are selling Greek yogurt. Boyz II Men recently made a cameo on
   How I Met Your Mother. This year's Super Bowl featured, of all people,
   Flea. We are having a moment of '90s nostalgia, occasioned in part by
   millennials (or The Youths or Those Kids or whatever you want to call
   them) who are aging into adulthood and therefore eager to relive their
   childhoods.

   Which leads to, among other things, Ice coming back—yet again—with a
   brand new invention. And he's in good company, too. The boxed dinner
   the returned rapper would like you to buy? It features noodles that are
   shaped like the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles.
   ***

   Nostalgia, the copious literature on it suggests, comes in two basic
   forms. One is organic, the kind that washes over you when you see an
   old picture of yourself and your cousins, aged 7 and 9 and 10, giggling
   maniacally while innertubing on Lake Michigan. The kind that emergences
   unexpectedly, as a kind of pleasant pang—the stuff of sudden songs and
   serendipitous scents and sour-sweet Madeleines.

   The other form—the form that may well feel most familiar to us at this
   point—is a media product. It's the re-introduction of Uncle Joey and/or
   Dawson’s Creek's Joey and/or Blossom's Joey, appropriated to arouse a
   vague sense that we have lost something as we’ve moved, inexorably,
   into our future. This form of nostalgia is usually invoked, in one way
   or another, to sell us stuff. You could, because of that, dismiss its
   validity (fauxstalgia?). But it will live on, inevitably, because media
   producers know exactly what advertisers have long understood: that
   nostalgia, like sex, sells.

   The products of that basic insight, whether they're movies or TV shows
   or weird appearances on terrible CBS sitcoms, tend to permeate the
   culture miasmically, their shiftings shaped by Hollywood and Wieden +
   Kennedy and the producers of Super Bowl Halftime Shows. And they can be
   good. They can be, sometimes, great! Take The Lego Movie (pardon me,
   The LEGO® Movie). And also: Mad Men and Boardwalk Empire and Masters of
   Sex and any theater that has ever offered a midnight showing of The Big
   Lebowski.

   Nostalgia, under the stewardship of the Internet, has been made nimble.

   As market goods, however, these products can also be recursive: Mad Men
   begat not only Banana Republic’s ’60s-inspired clothing line, but also
   books like Mad Women: The Other Side of Life on Madison Avenue in the
   '60s and Beyond. Baz Luhrmann’s remake of The Great Gatsby wasn’t
   merely a movie; it was also an album (a Target exclusive of which
   features three bonus tracks!) and a line of Brooks Brothers clothing
   and a collection of Tiffany jewelry.

   While, sure, commercial culture is commercial, it’s also notable how
   ambient nostalgia has become. The memorial-industrial complex ensures
   that our past—our collective past—permeates our present. That complex
   markets directly to memories that are shared, across generations and
   across demographics and across the culture.

   And the complex is extending, now, to the Internet.

                                     ***

   Donovan Sung manages discovery and recommendations at Spotify, the
   streaming music service that, as of the end of last year, claims 24
   million active users and 4.5 billion hours’ worth of song streams. Sung
   spends a lot of his time thinking about how to engage users and
   encourage their loyalty through the particular medium of music—about
   how to make those billions of hours, essentially, time that users will
   consider well spent. One of those ways is through what Spotify calls
   “stories”: little advertisements that live within the app and surface
   song recommendations to users.

   The stories vary in their messaging. Some are about making lateral
   connections between different songs and artists (“You listened to Otis
   Redding this week. Want to try James Brown?”). Some are about
   connecting users to their geographic settings (“This album by Foster
   the People is trending near you”). Some are about connecting users to
   songs whose rhythm or moods they might find appealing (“You listened to
   Neutral Milk Hotel this week. Want to try Sea Wolf?”).

   But some of Spotify’s most effective stories, Sung told me, take a
   slightly different tack: They present songs based not on your activity
   within Spotify, but on your activity outside of it. Activity that
   occurred long before Spotify was a gleam in Daniel Ek's eye.

   So some of the stories you’ll see on Spotify look like this:

   And like this:

   These recommendations vary according to a user’s birth date, which is
   one of the pieces of information Spotify gathers from its new members
   when they first sign up for the service. (Gender is another one.)
   Spotify uses those data points, in part, to read users’ pasts back to
   them, offering up a fairly faithful (re-)rendition of the popular
   musical landscape as it existed when they were younger.

   In all this, to be clear, Spotify isn’t necessarily surfacing the songs
   you were listening to when you were in high school. (Its data-tracking
   notwithstanding, how could it possibly know about the Fiona Apple phase
   you went through sophomore year?) What it’s doing, instead, is
   surfacing the songs that were popular across the culture when you were
   in junior or high school. The service is making the fair assumption
   that there will indeed be some overlap between your own musical past
   and the collective. And that, whether or not you care to admit it
   today, hearing “Hit Me, Baby, One More Time” again will take you right
   back to a particular moment in your life—that time you danced to it.
   That time you heard it on the radio as you were driving back from
   soccer practice. That time you tried, and totally failed, to unhear it.

   The point of all this past-leveraging, from Spotify’s perspective, is
   to realize the vague-but-also-urgent goal shared by many social
   networks and services: user engagement. "For almost everyone,” Sung
   says, a nostalgia-focused Spotify story “usually triggers some sort of
   strong emotion. Sometimes it's, 'Wow, I totally forgot that song.
   Thanks so much for reminding me of it.' Other times, it's more like,
   'Yeah, I remember music was pretty bad when I was young.’” (Case in
   point? "One of the stories I got was 'Britney Spears was big when you
   were young,’” Sung says. “And I was like, 'Yeah, I totally remember
   that, and I don't need to remember it again.’”)

   Either way, though: engagement. And an experience of the past that is
   customized—if not to a person, individually, then to that person's
   generational demographic. Spotify’s interpretation of nostalgia, in
   that sense, is pretty much the opposite of The LEGO® Movie’s or Mad
   Men's or that of Kraft-by-way-of-the-Ninja Turtles-by-way-of-Vanilla
   Ice. It's not aimed at a broad public. It’s not enforced at the level
   of the mass culture. Instead, it’s aimed directly at the user.

   It’s a targeted ad, essentially—and the thing being advertised is a
   person’s own past.

                                     ***

   Spotify isn’t alone in its use of nostalgia as a marketing tool. Social
   networks in general, you could argue, are
   implicitly—preemptively—nostalgic, combining our pasts and our
   presences into a unified experience.

   Networks, however, are also experimenting with more explicit forms of
   nostalgia-baiting. Earlier this month, Facebook rolled out “Look Back”
   compilations that collect users’ most-liked photos, statuses, and life
   events into an easily viewable video. (These collections come in
   addition to the old standby, the network’s “Year in Review” feature.)
   Instagram, of course, lets you present your self-shot digital images
   through the filters of analog cameras—a feature that users sometimes
   employ to participate in "throwback Thursday."

   And also! An app called Timehop promises to show you “photos and
   updates from this exact day in history.” Google Plus, as a default
   feature of its profile page, creates a personalized map highlighting
   the geographical locations a user has called home—an individualized
   bildungsroman, as told through markers. Google itself allows users to
   export their web histories—which double as page-by-page retrackings,
   essentially, of lives as lived on the Internet—for both archiving and
   analysis. Twitter, similarly, lets you download a complete archive of
   your tweet history—under the logic that, as Twitter engineer Mollie
   Vandor explained, “We know lots of you would like to explore your
   Twitter past.”

   Even Pinterest, which is most commonly associated with future-oriented
   and aspirational image-collecting, makes use of customized nostalgia.
   Gabriel Trionfi, Pinterest's user experience researcher, is a
   psychologist by training, and he points out that the flip side of
   anticipation—one of the emotions Pinterest uses to generation its own
   version of user engagement—is, yep, nostalgia.

   Journalists have long recognized the same thing advertisers have, which
   is that nostalgia is an extremely efficient tool for selling stuff.

   “Nostalgia is a known way to boost people's mood,” Trionfi told me. It
   allows people to live (and re-live) “something familiar, something they
   remember, a positive emotional experience.” On Pinterest, he points
   out, if you do a search for something like "80s kid" or "90s toys" or
   "80s cartoon," you'll be greeted with a wide of assortment of boards
   that celebrate users' youths. So people are using Pinterest’s
   future-oriented platform, Trionfi says, to re-collect images from their
   past.

   Nostalgia, at its most basic level, requires access to memories—and
   there is, of course, no better archive than the Internet. The social
   networks that are becoming increasingly synonymous with our experience
   of that Internet are attempting to use that fact for their own gain. “I
   think you see people seeking out and collecting these things,” Trionfi
   notes, for one simple reason: “Because it makes them feel good."

   The good feeling is growing. Many media outlets ("content producers,"
   you could call them) are selling nostalgia in one form or another:
   There’s Retronaut and @historyinpix and the many similar—and
   controversial—features dedicated to the resurfacing of the past.
   There’s New York magazine’s late, great “Nostalgia Face-Check” series.
   Yesterday, Wired—known mostly for its reporting on the future—published
   a list, curated by Questlove, of the top hip-hop tracks of the ’90s.
   (Questlove's collection includes something from Tony! Toni! Toné!, and
   is therefore awesome.)

   This is all fairly unremarkable; journalists have long recognized the
   same thing advertisers have, which is that nostalgia is an extremely
   efficient tool for selling stuff. But media outlets—especially the ones
   that are merging technological prowess with journalistic—aren’t just
   leveraging our soft enthusiasms for the past; they’re also taking a
   platform-focused approach to that work. They, like the social networks,
   are trafficking in targeted nostalgia.

   Take Buzzfeed’s ever-more-ubiquitous quizzes. “Which ‘90s Movie
   Soundtrack Are You?” asks one. “Which Grease Pink Lady Are You?” asks
   another. “Which Al Roker Are You?” asks yet another. (I am, apparently,
   “Al Roker Lifted by Ryan Gosling.” So.)

   “The quiz is kind of like the broken-down-to-its-core of what BuzzFeed
   is,” Summer Anne Burton, Buzzfeed’s managing editorial director and the
   head of its quiz initiative, told Nieman Lab. “It gives someone
   something that they can relate to well enough that they can share it
   with others.” Buzzfeed built a custom template so that its staffers and
   its community contributors can easily create these identity-focused
   questionnaires.

   Its quizzes are, at this point, the heirs of Buzzfeed’s lists, which
   are most commonly associated with generational demographics. (“25 Ways
   to Tell You’re a Kid of the ‘90s,” went one of those. And: “50 Things
   Only 80s Kids Can Understand.” And also: “53 Things Only ’80s Girls Can
   Understand.”) The sharetastic questionnaires allow users to identify
   with each other by means of their pasts. They do what journalists have
   long tried to do—identify microgenerations—by talking directly to the
   people who fit those demographics.

   The upshot of all this? Nostalgia no longer comes in one-size-fits-all,
   and that size is no longer “large.” Nostalgia, under the stewardship of
   the Internet, has been made nimble. Our tenuous relationship with the
   past can now be customized and made relevant, in the manner of a
   marketing message. We, like Proust, search for lost time. It's just
   that our seeking stretches beyond our own meager memories. And it may
   involve, for better or for worse, Britney Spears.
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-4">
<text>


   IFRAME: //www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-5P3SZGS

   (BUTTON)
   Menu
   Verywell Mind
   What Is Nostalgia?
     * Mental Health A-Z
          + Addiction
          + ADHD
          + Bipolar Disorder
          + Depression
          + Race and Identity
          + PTSD
          + View All
     * Self-Improvement
          + Stress Management
          + Happiness
          + Meditation
          + Brain Health
          + Relationships
          + Online Therapy
          + View All
     * Psychology
          + Theories
          + History and Biographies
          + Student Resources
          + Therapy
          + Emotions
          + Sleep and Dreaming
          + View All
     * Podcast
          + Self-Improvement
          + Motivation
          + Mental Strength
          + Family &amp; Relationships
          + Anxiety &amp; Depression
          + Addiction
          + View All
     * News
          + Coronavirus
          + Mental Health
          + Verywell Mind Insights
          + The Winter Issue
     * About Us
          + Editorial Process
          + Meet Our Review Board
          + Crisis Support

   (BUTTON) Search
   (BUTTON) Search (BUTTON) Clear ____________________ (BUTTON) GO
   More in Mental Health A-Z
     * Kids' Mental Health
     * Addiction
     * ADHD
     * Eating Disorders
     * Social Anxiety Disorder
     * Bipolar Disorder
     * BPD
     * Depression
     * GAD
     * LGBTQ+
     * Neurological Disorders
     * PTSD
     * OCD
     * Panic Disorder
     * Gender Identity
     * Sexual Identity
     * Race and Identity
     * Schizophrenia

   View More

     * Mental Health A-Z
          + Addiction
          + ADHD
          + Bipolar Disorder
          + Depression
          + Race and Identity
          + PTSD
          + View All
     * Self-Improvement
          + Stress Management
          + Happiness
          + Meditation
          + Brain Health
          + Relationships
          + Online Therapy
          + View All
     * Psychology
          + Theories
          + History and Biographies
          + Student Resources
          + Therapy
          + Emotions
          + Sleep and Dreaming
          + View All
     * Podcast
          + Self-Improvement
          + Motivation
          + Mental Strength
          + Family &amp; Relationships
          + Anxiety &amp; Depression
          + Addiction
          + View All
     * News
          + Coronavirus
          + Mental Health
          + Verywell Mind Insights
          + The Winter Issue
          + View All

     * About Us
     * Editorial Process
     * Privacy Policy
     * Contact Us

   Verywell Health
   Verywell Fit
   Verywell Family
   Verywell Mind's content is for informational and educational purposes
   only. Our website is not intended to be a substitute for professional
   medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment.
   TRUSTe
   Ⓒ 2022 Dotdash Media, Inc. — All rights reserved

   IFRAME: about:blank

   Mental Health A-Z

What Is Nostalgia?

   By
   Arlin Cuncic
   Arlin Cuncic Arlin Cuncic
   Arlin Cuncic
   Arlin Cuncic, MA, is the author of "Therapy in Focus: What to Expect
   from CBT for Social Anxiety Disorder" and "7 Weeks to Reduce Anxiety."
   Learn about our editorial process
   Published on May 23, 2022
   Medically reviewed
   Verywell Mind articles are reviewed by board-certified physicians and
   mental healthcare professionals. Medical Reviewers confirm the content
   is thorough and accurate, reflecting the latest evidence-based
   research. Content is reviewed before publication and upon substantial
   updates. Learn more.
   by
   Sabrina Romanoff, PsyD
   Sabrina Romanoff Sabrina Romanoff
   Medically reviewed by Sabrina Romanoff, PsyD
     * LinkedIn
     * Twitter

   Dr. Sabrina Romanoff, PsyD, is a licensed clinical psychologist and a
   professor at Yeshiva University’s clinical psychology doctoral program.
   Learn about our Medical Review Board
   (BUTTON) Print
   Man and woman looking at nostalgic photos. Man and woman looking at
   nostalgic photos.

   Klaus Vedfelt / Getty Images
   Table of Contents
   View All
   Table of Contents
     * What Is Nostalgia?
     * History
     * Examples
     * Types
     * Benefits
     * Negative Effects
     * How to Avoid the Negative Effects

What Is Nostalgia?

Nostalgia

   Nostalgia is a sentimentality for the past, typically for a period or
   place with happy personal associations. Nostalgia is usually triggered
   by something reminding an individual of an experience from the past. It
   is often characterized as a longing or desire to return to a former
   time or place.

   Nostalgia can also be thought of as "the memory of happiness," as it is
   often associated with happy memories from the past. It can be a source
   of comfort in times of sadness or distress.

   However, nostalgia is not just about happy memories; it can also be
   about longing for a time when things were simpler, or for a time when
   we felt more connected to others.

History of Nostalgia

   Nostalgia is a relatively new concept. The word was first coined in
   1688 by Swiss physician Johannes Hofer, who defined it as a
   neurological illness of continually thinking about one's homeland and
   longing for return.

   It was not until the 19th century that nostalgia began to be seen as a
   positive sentiment, rather than a pathological condition. Swiss
   psychiatrist Carl Jung, for example, saw nostalgia as a way of
   reconnecting with our past and understanding our present. For Jung,
   nostalgia was a way to access the "collective unconscious"—the shared
   history and experiences that we all have as human beings.

   During the First World War, nostalgia was once again associated with
   illness, as soldiers away at battle longed for the comforts of home.
   However, after the war ended, nostalgia once again became a positive
   sentiment.

Examples of Nostalgia From Popular Culture

   There are many examples of nostalgia in popular culture. The film It's
   a Wonderful Life (1946) is often cited as one of the most nostalgic
   films ever made. The film tells the story of George Bailey (played by
   Jimmy Stewart), a man who is considering suicide on Christmas Eve.

   However, he is visited by an angel who shows him how different his
   life, and the lives of those around him, would have been if he had
   never been born. The film's sentimental portrayal of small-town life in
   the early 20th century has helped to make it a holiday classic.

   The television series The Wonder Years (1988-1993) is another example
   of nostalgia. The show tells the story of Kevin Arnold (played by Fred
   Savage), a boy growing up in the suburbs in the 1960s and 1970s. The
   show is notable for its use of voice-over narration from Kevin's older
   self, which gives the show a nostalgic feeling.

   The song "I Will Always Love You" by Whitney Houston (originally
   released in 1992) is often cited as a nostalgic song. The song was
   written by Dolly Parton and is about a woman who is leaving her lover.
   However, she promises to always love him, even though they are no
   longer together. The song's sentimental lyrics and melody have helped
   to make it one of the most popular love songs of all time.

Types of Nostalgia

   There are two types of nostalgia: positive and negative.
     * Positive nostalgia is characterized by happy, rose-tinted memories
       of the past. It is often associated with feelings of warmth,
       happiness, and comfort.
     * Negative nostalgia, on the other hand, is characterized by
       bittersweet or even painful memories of the past.It is often
       associated with longing, sadness, and regret.

   Nostalgia can also be divided into three different categories:
   personal, social, and cultural.
     * Personal nostalgia is characterized by memories of specific people
       or events from one's own life.
     * Social nostalgia is characterized by memories of a time when one
       felt more connected to others.
     * Cultural nostalgia is characterized by memories of a time when one
       felt more connected to their culture.

Benefits of Nostalgia

   Nostalgia has been shown to have a number of benefits. For example,
   nostalgia has been shown to:
     * Boost mood
     * Increase self-esteem
     * Provide a sense of social support
     * Help people to cope with difficult life transitions, such as
       divorce, retirement, and death

   Nostalgia can also have positive effects on physical health. For
   example, nostalgia has been shown to boost immune function and reduce
   stress levels.Nostalgia can also help to increase life satisfaction and
   reduce anxiety.

Negative Effects of Nostalgia

   However, nostalgia can also have negative effects. For example,
   nostalgia can:
     * Lead to a sense of loneliness and isolation
     * Cause people to dwell on the past and become unhappy with the
       present
     * Make people less likely to take action in the present

   'I Hate Life': What to Do If Nothing Makes You Happy

How to Avoid the Negative Effects of Nostalgia

   There are a few things you can do to avoid the negative effects of
   nostalgia:
     * Think about the present moment. What are you doing right now that
       you enjoy?
     * Make an effort to connect with others in the present. Spend time
       with people you care about. Talk to them about your positive
       memories.
     * Do things that make you happy. Listen to music, go for walks, watch
       your favorite movie.
     * Talk to a therapist. If you're feeling particularly down, talking
       to a therapist can help.
     * Be mindful. Be aware of how much time you spend dwelling on the
       past.

   What Is Mindfulness?

A Word From Verywell

   Nostalgia is a complex emotion that can have both positive and negative
   effects. If you find yourself feeling nostalgic, try to focus on the
   present moment and the people you care about. If nostalgia is causing
   you distress, it may be helpful to talk to a therapist.
   13 Sources
   Verywell Mind uses only high-quality sources, including peer-reviewed
   studies, to support the facts within our articles. Read our editorial
   process to learn more about how we fact-check and keep our content
   accurate, reliable, and trustworthy.
    1. The Atlantic. When Nostalgia Was a Disease.
    2. Battesti M. Nostalgia in the Army (17th-19th Centuries). Front
       Neurol Neurosci. 2016;38:132-142. doi:10.1159/000442652
    3. Batcho KI. Nostalgia: The bittersweet history of a psychological
       concept. Hist Psychol. 2013;16(3):165-176. doi:10.1037/a0032427
    4. National Endowment for the Arts. Did You Know.... It's a Wonderful
       Life edition.
    5. Biography. 10 Things You May Not Know About the Wonder Years.
    6. Whitney Houston. Whitney Houston ‘I Will Always Love You’ #1 In
       1992
    7. Abeyta AA, Routledge C, Kaslon S. Combating Loneliness With
       Nostalgia: Nostalgic Feelings Attenuate Negative Thoughts and
       Motivations Associated With Loneliness. Front Psychol.
       2020;11:1219. Published 2020 Jun 23. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01219
    8. Newman DB, Sachs ME. The Negative Interactive Effects of Nostalgia
       and Loneliness on Affect in Daily Life. Front Psychol.
       2020;11:2185. Published 2020 Sep 2. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2020.02185
    9. Jiang T, Cheung WY, Wildschut T, Sedikides C. Nostalgia,
       reflection, brooding: Psychological benefits and autobiographical
       memory functions. Conscious Cogn. 2021;90:103107.
       doi:10.1016/j.concog.2021.103107
   10. Ismail S, Christopher G, Dodd E, et al. Psychological and Mnemonic
       Benefits of Nostalgia for People with Dementia. J Alzheimers Dis.
       2018;65(4):1327-1344. doi:10.3233/JAD-180075
   11. Juhl J, Wildschut T, Sedikides C, Xiong X, Zhou X. Nostalgia
       promotes help seeking by fostering social connectedness. Emotion.
       2021;21(3):631-643. doi:10.1037/emo0000720
   12. Batcho KI. Nostalgia: retreat or support in difficult times?. Am J
       Psychol. 2013;126(3):355-367. doi:10.5406/amerjpsyc.126.3.0355
   13. Newman DB, Sachs ME, Stone AA, Schwarz N. Nostalgia and well-being
       in daily life: An ecological validity perspective. J Pers Soc
       Psychol. 2020;118(2):325-347. doi:10.1037/pspp0000236

   [GettyImages-1343456972-d5687201f17147098ba38630609a4d7f.jpg]

   By Arlin Cuncic
   Arlin Cuncic, MA, is the author of "Therapy in Focus: What to Expect
   from CBT for Social Anxiety Disorder" and "7 Weeks to Reduce Anxiety."
   See Our Editorial Process
   Meet Our Review Board
   Share Feedback
   Was this page helpful?
   Thanks for your feedback!
   What is your feedback?
   (BUTTON) Other (BUTTON) Helpful (BUTTON) Report an Error
   ____________________________________________________________
   ____________________________________________________________
   ____________________________________________________________
   ____________________________________________________________
   (BUTTON) Submit
   Related Articles
   Close up of a senior woman on a video call with her therapist Close up
   of a senior woman on a video call with her therapist
   What Is Reminiscence Therapy?
   ornaments in a special storage box ornaments in a special storage box
   Why Putting Up Holiday Decorations Early Could Make You Feel Happier
   Types of intimacy in a relationship Types of intimacy in a relationship
   What Is Intimacy in a Relationship?
   Tips to cope with a bad memory Tips to cope with a bad memory
   How to Forget Things On Purpose
   A couple in love holding hands A couple in love holding hands
   What Is Love?
   person with headphones person with headphones
   How Music Affects Those With Alzheimer's Disease
   Woman's hand holding box that contains black and white photos Woman's
   hand holding box that contains black and white photos
   What Is Memory?
   meditating meditating
   What Is Mindfulness?
   Woman sleeping near bedside table with water Woman sleeping near
   bedside table with water
   What Is NREM Sleep?
   Andy Grammer Andy Grammer
   Why Even Happy People Get Depressed With Multi-Platinum
   Singer/Songwriter Andy Grammer
   Symptoms of confabulation Symptoms of confabulation
   What Is Confabulation?
   Happiness Happiness
   What Is Happiness?
   woman sitting on counter looking at her phone woman sitting on counter
   looking at her phone
   Reaching Out to Others Has a Greater Impact Than You'd Expect
   Young woman lying on couch and therapist leaning toward her with hands
   clasped Young woman lying on couch and therapist leaning toward her
   with hands clasped
   What Is Psychoanalysis?
   [young-woman-lying-on-couch-therapist-leaning-toward-her-with-hands-cla
   sped-cropped-529377874-57a48e0c5f9b58974a1ebd48.jpg]
   What Is Unrequited Love?
   A photography of a man talking to his therapist. A photography of a man
   talking to his therapist.
   What Is Psychoanalytic Therapy?
   Verywell Mind
   Daily Tips for a Healthy Mind to Your Inbox

   ____________________ (BUTTON) Sign Up
   You're in!

   Thank you, {{form.email}}, for signing up.

   There was an error. Please try again.
     * Mental Health A-Z
     * Self-Improvement
     * Psychology
     * News
     * Voices
     * The Verywell Mind Podcast

     * Meet Our Review Board
     * About Us
     * Editorial Process
     * Diversity Pledge
     * Privacy Policy
     * In the News
     * Advertise
     * Terms of Use
     * Careers
     * Contact
     * EU Privacy
     * Crisis Support

   Follow Us
     * instagram
     * tiktok
     * facebook
     * flipboard

   Verywell Health
   Verywell Fit
   Verywell Family
   Verywell Mind's content is for informational and educational purposes
   only. Our website is not intended to be a substitute for professional
   medical advice, diagnosis, or treatment.
   TRUSTe
   Ⓒ 2022 Dotdash Media, Inc. — All rights reserved
   Verywell Mind is part of the Dotdash Meredith publishing family.

   When you visit the site, Dotdash Meredith and its partners may store or
   retrieve information on your browser, mostly in the form of cookies.
   Cookies collect information about your preferences and your devices and
   are used to make the site work as you expect it to, to understand how
   you interact with the site, and to show advertisements that are
   targeted to your interests. You can find out more about our use, change
   your default settings, and withdraw your consent at any time with
   effect for the future by visiting Cookies Settings, which can also be
   found in the footer of the site.
   (BUTTON) Cookies Settings (BUTTON) Reject All (BUTTON) Accept All
   (BUTTON)
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-5">
<text>
   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-PMMZ8Q

   Skip to main navigationSkip to main contentThe University of
   Southampton

     * Courses
          + Undergraduate
          + Postgraduate taught
          + Postgraduate research
          + Foundation Years
          + Pre-sessional English language courses
          + Exchanges
          + Customise your degree
          + Tuition fees
          + Funding your studies
          + How to apply
          + Clearing
          + Free online learning
          + Continuing professional development
     * Student life
          + Accommodation
          + Our campuses
          + Our cities
          + Student community
          + Sports and gyms
          + Support and money
     * Research
          + Our impact
          + Facilities
          + Centres and institutes
          + REF
          + Funding
          + Research &amp; Innovation Services
          + Partnerships
          + Commercialising research
          + Researcher support
          + Research integrity
     * Business
          + Why work with us?
          + Collaboration
          + Consultancy
          + Commercialisation
          + Use our facilities
          + Connect with our students
          + How we operate
          + Suppliers
          + Make a business enquiry
     * Global
          + International students
          + International Office
          + Partnerships and initiatives
          + Visiting delegations
          + Visiting fellowships

     * About
     * Visit
     * Alumni
     * Departments
     * News
     * Events
     * Contact

   ×
   Search the Site ____________________ (BUTTON) Search

   Nostalgia

     * What is Nostalgia...
     * Collaborators
     * Publications
     * Media coverage
     * Southampton Nostalgia Scale
     * Grant support
     * Research Participation
     * Links
     * Contact us

   LeftRight

   Home>gt;
   Nostalgia
   What is Nostalgia...
   >gt;

What Nostalgia Is and What It Does

   Hepper, Ritchie, Sedikides, and Wildschut (2012, Emotion) describe
   nostalgia as a complex emotion that involves past-oriented cognition
   and a mixed affective signature. The emotion is often triggered by
   encountering a familiar smell, sound, or keepsake, by engaging in
   conversations, or by feeling lonely. When waxing nostalgic, one
   remembers, thinks about, reminisces about, or dwells on a memory from
   one’s past—typically a fond, personally meaningful memory such as one’s
   childhood or a close relationship. One often views the memory through
   rose-tinted glasses, misses that time or person, longs for it, and may
   even wish to return to the past. As a result, one typically feels
   emotional, most often happy but with a sense of loss and longing; other
   less common feelings include comfort, calm, regret, sadness, pain, or
   an overall sense of bittersweetness.

   Nostalgia confers psychological benefits. When engaging in nostalgic
   reflection, people report a stronger sense of belongingness,
   affiliation, or sociality; they convey higher continuity between their
   past and their present; they describe their lives as more meaningful;
   and they often indicate higher levels of self-esteem and positive mood.
   Although nostalgic engagement (especially when it is carried out
   habitually and excessively) may not be beneficial to all, it is in
   general a resource on which people can capitalize to harness strength—a
   resource that allows them to cope more effectively with the
   vicissitudes of life.

Why Does Nostalgia Feel So Nice?

   "The holidays have a way of bringing up fond memories that can warm
   your heart. But are there any actual health benefits to nostalgia? It's
   more than just a longing for the past, and as Anthony and Laci explain,
   these sentiments can be quite good for us. "

   (D news, 25/12/13)
   Video link to:

    Why Does Nostalgia Feel So Nice?

   Privacy Settings

   Information for
          Visitors
          Staff &amp; students
          Schools &amp; colleges
          Researchers
          Employers &amp; recruiters
          Parents &amp; guardians
          International students

   Contact us
          +44(0)23 8059 5000
          +44(0)23 8059 3131

   Address
          University of Southampton
          University Road
          Southampton
          SO17 1BJ
          United Kingdom

   Get directions ›

   Connect with us
          Connect with us on Facebook
          Connect with us on Twitter
          Connect with us on Instagram
          Connect with us on LinkedIn
          Explore our Youtube channel

Download University of Southampton prospectus

   Download a PDF of our prospectus or order a printed copy to be
   delivered to your door.
   Download a prospectus

   © 2022 University of Southampton
     * Site map
     * Sitemap XML
     * Accessibility
     * Privacy Notice
     * Modern Slavery Act Statement
     * Terms &amp; conditions
     * Contact
     * Jobs
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-6">
<text>
   (BUTTON) Skip to main content

   IFRAME:
   https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-TFKV632&amp;gtm_auth=NsJH3T
   s1-89I8lZURwQYmw&amp;gtm_preview=env-1&amp;gtm_cookies_win=x

   IFRAME:
   https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-N279F7B&amp;gtm_auth=jfKETt
   lWamfZ4l02YiFCQw&amp;gtm_preview=env-1&amp;gtm_cookies_win=x

     * (BUTTON) Download Article
       Download Article
          + Download PDF
          + ReadCube
          + EPUB
          + XML (NLM)
       (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)
       Share on
          +
          +
          +
       (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)
       Export citation
          + EndNote
          + Reference Manager
          + Simple TEXT file
          + BibTex
       (BUTTON)

     * total views
     *

   View Article Impact

SHARE ON

     *
     *
     *
     *
     *

Edited by

Jeffrey D. Green

   Virginia Commonwealth University, United States

Reviewed by

Krystine I. Batcho

   Le Moyne College, United States

TABLE OF CONTENTS

     *
          + Opinion
          + Future-Oriented Affect
          + Future-Oriented Behavior
          + Future-Oriented Social Cognition
          + The Motivated Brain
          + The Need For An Interpersonal Approach: Shared Nostalgia
          + Drawing From The Past For The Future
          + Author Contributions
          + Funding
          + Conflict of Interest
          + References

     * (BUTTON) Export citation
          + EndNote
          + Reference Manager
          + Simple TEXT file
          + BibTex

   Check for updates

People also looked at

OPINION article

   Front. Psychol., 03 June 2020
   Sec. Emotion Science
   https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01133

Is Nostalgia a Past or Future-Oriented Experience? Affective, Behavioral,
Social Cognitive, and Neuroscientific Evidence

   [24] Taylor A. FioRito^* and [24] Clay Routledge
     * Department of Psychology, North Dakota State University, Fargo, ND,
       United States

   Nostalgia, a sentimental longing for the past, is a common, universal,
   and highly social emotional experience. Nostalgic reverie is centered
   around the self, important social connections, and personally
   meaningful life events (e.g., graduation; Routledge, 2015). In other
   words, when people bring to mind memories that make them nostalgic,
   they are revisiting personally meaningful life events shared with loved
   ones. A growing body of research positions nostalgia as a psychological
   resource with self-regulatory implications. Negative affective states
   such as sadness, loneliness, and meaninglessness trigger nostalgia and
   nostalgia, in turn, enhances well-being, feelings of social
   connectedness, and perceptions of meaning in life (e.g., Routledge et
   al., 2013). Building on the behavioral inhibition (BIS/avoidance
   motivation) and behavioral activation (BAS/approach motivation)
   regulatory model Carver and White (1994), research also indicates that
   the activation of avoidance motivation increases nostalgia, which then
   activates approach motivation (Stephan et al., 2014). In the present
   analysis, we draw on the current state of the science to propose that
   nostalgia is ultimately a future-oriented emotional experience.
   Nostalgia involves reflecting on past experiences but it motivates
   affective states, behaviors, and goals that improve people's future
   lives. In the following sections, we briefly review relevant evidence
   across affective, behavioral, social cognitive, and neuroscientific
   indicators and close by considering the need for future research
   focused on nostalgia as a shared experience.

Future-Oriented Affect

   Nostalgia increases general well-being (Routledge et al., 2013) but
   also positively impacts motivation-relevant affect. For instance,
   nostalgia increases optimism (Cheung et al., 2013, 2016) inspiration
   (Stephan et al., 2015) social efficacy (Abeyta et al., 2015) and
   feelings of purpose in life (Routledge et al., 2011). In addition, as
   people get older, nostalgia makes them feel youthful and more
   optimistic about their health (Abeyta and Routledge, 2016). People's
   written accounts of nostalgic memories also frequently contain themes
   of appreciation for both the past and hopefulness for the future
   (Routledge, 2015). In short, nostalgia promotes the types of affective
   states that mobilize the self for action.

Future-Oriented Behavior

   Critically, nostalgia-induced affective states promote relevant
   behavior. For instance, health optimism triggered by nostalgia is
   associated with increased intentions to exercise and eat well, as well
   as subsequent levels of physical activity (Kersten et al., 2016).
   Similarly, the social efficacy nostalgia engenders leads to increased
   social engagement (Abeyta et al., 2015). More broadly, when people
   experience nostalgia, they are subsequently more likely to engage in
   prosocial behavior (Stephan et al., 2014), including charitable giving
   (Zhou et al., 2012). Nostalgia doesn't just make people feel inspired.
   It drives them to act on their inspiration.

Future-Oriented Social Cognition

   Arguably, the most compelling evidence that nostalgia is a
   future-oriented emotional experience is its effects on goal-related
   cognition, since goals are about the future. Nostalgia increases the
   importance people assign to relationship goals, intentions to pursue
   the goal of connecting with friends, and the desire to resolve a
   relationship problem (Abeyta et al., 2015). More broadly, nostalgia
   increases the motivation to pursue one's most important goal (Sedikides
   et al., 2017).

   Given the social nature of nostalgia, its impact on goals may be
   strongest in the interpersonal domain. Relatedly, nostalgia's impact on
   social motivation is moderated by individual differences in
   attachment-related avoidance (Abeyta et al., 2019). For individuals who
   rely on relationships for psychological comfort (low attachment-related
   avoidance), nostalgia increases social goal pursuit. For those who do
   not rely on relationships for comfort (high attachment-related
   avoidance), nostalgia decreases social goal pursuit. In sum, nostalgia
   mobilizes the self, particularly the social self.

The Motivated Brain

   The neuroscience of nostalgia remains limited. Nostalgia proneness is
   positively related to right-frontal electroencephalogram (EEG)
   asymmetry, an indicator avoidance motivation and negative emotions
   (Tullett et al., 2015). Although this evidence is correlational, and
   thus, we cannot determine causality from it, this finding is in line
   with past research suggesting that negative emotions and experiences,
   such as loneliness and meaninglessness, trigger nostalgia as a
   regulatory resource (e.g., Routledge et al., 2013). More recently,
   Bocincova et al. (2019) found that nostalgia reduced error related
   negativity (ERN; a neurological indicator of avoidance motivation) in
   response to making a mistake in a modified Flanker task, which is
   consistent with research indicating that nostalgia orients people away
   from avoidant and toward approach-related psychological states (Stephan
   et al., 2014). Notably, a preregistered follow-up study did not
   replicate these findings (FioRito et al., 2020). Further research is
   required to examine if, and how, nostalgia affects motivation as
   measured using social neuroscientific paradigms.

The Need For An Interpersonal Approach: Shared Nostalgia

   Although previous research demonstrates that nostalgia is primarily
   focused on social relationships, almost no work has explored how
   nostalgia occurs in a social setting. Nostalgia likely frequently
   implicates social interaction. Indeed, up to 75 percent of
   conversations may include nostalgic content (Pasupathi et al., 2002;
   Fivush, 2008; Baron and Bluck, 2009; Beike et al., 2016). Therefore,
   future research should explore nostalgia as a shared experience. We
   define shared nostalgia as nostalgia transmitted to at least one other
   person or exchanged between two or more people. The nature of shared
   nostalgia needs to be determined. How often does this occur? With whom?
   What is the role of approach motivation in sharing nostalgic memories
   with and between others? What social and emotional benefits, if any,
   can be gained?

   We posit that individuals share nostalgia for two purposes: to create
   and to maintain social connections. The future-oriented qualities of
   nostalgia may prompt an individual to share a nostalgic memory with an
   acquaintance to build closeness. Alternatively, those who discuss
   nostalgic memories with others may “bring online” a social approach
   motivation, increasing the extent to which the individuals connect. For
   instance, discussing a nostalgic childhood experience with a new
   acquaintance could promote self-disclosing behavior in both
   individuals. Does this boost a desire to deepen the relationship from
   acquaintances to friends? Moreover, people may discuss a nostalgic
   memory with others who also experienced in order to maintain the
   established intimacy. As an example, a couple reflecting together on
   their first date may feel intimate feelings toward one another. Does
   this, in turn, increase intentions to stay together?

Drawing From The Past For The Future

   By definition, nostalgia is a past-focused affective experience. A
   growing body of evidence, however, documents the future-oriented nature
   of nostalgia. Specifically, people can reference their nostalgic past
   to remind themselves what it felt to be young (Abeyta and Routledge,
   2016) and loved (e.g., Cheung et al., 2013), which, in turn, promotes
   future-oriented behavior, such as physically caring for oneself
   (Kersten et al., 2016), connecting with others (e.g., Abeyta et al.,
   2015), and pursuing goals (e.g., Sedikides et al., 2017). There are
   deviations from this process, however. For instance, Cheung et al.
   (2019) recently introduced the concept of anticipated nostalgia. This
   construct is unique in that it does not rely on the reflections of the
   past. Instead, anticipated nostalgia is nostalgia for the present and
   the future (e.g., “I anticipate I will feel nostalgic about my
   children's childhood in the future”). Critically, Cheung et al. (2019)
   found that anticipated nostalgia is related to deliberate savoring
   techniques, such as purchasing souvenirs and documenting moments with
   pictures. Thus, anticipated nostalgia could be considered a
   future-focused experience that promotes future-oriented behavior. When
   discussing the future-oriented nature of nostalgia, individual
   differences should be considered, as well; not everyone benefits from
   using nostalgia (e.g., attachment-related avoidance; Wildschut et al.,
   2010; Juhl et al., 2012; Abeyta et al., 2019). Future research should
   examine other instances in which nostalgia does not result in
   future-oriented behavior.

   Taken together, when individuals engage in nostalgic reflection, they
   are not hiding in the past. They are accessing meaningful memories from
   the past in order to help them approach the future with purpose.

Author Contributions

   TF and CR contributed to the writing of the manuscript.

Funding

   This publication was supported by an Institutional Development Award
   (IDeA) from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences of the
   National Institutes of Health under Grant no. 5P30 GM114748.

Conflict of Interest

   The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
   any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
   potential conflict of interest.

References

   Abeyta, A. A., Nelson, T. A., and Routledge, C. (2019). The pushes and
   pulls of the past: The effects of attachment-related avoidance and
   nostalgia on approach-oriented social goals. Personal. Indiv. Diff.
   149, 200–208. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2019.06.008

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Abeyta, A. A., and Routledge, C. (2016). Fountain of youth: the impact
   of nostalgia on youthfulness and implications for health. Self Identity
   15, 356–369. doi: 10.1080/15298868.2015.1133452

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Abeyta, A. A., Routledge, C., and Juhl, J. (2015). Looking back to move
   forward: nostalgia as a psychological resource for promoting
   relationship goals and overcoming relationship challenges. J. Personal.
   Soc. Psychol. 109, 1029–1044. doi: 10.1037/pspi0000036

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Baron, J. M., and Bluck, S. (2009). Autobiographical memory sharing in
   everyday life: characteristics of a good story. Int. J. Behav. Dev. 33,
   105–117. doi: 10.1177/0165025408098039

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Beike, D. R., Brandon, N. R., and Cole, H. E. (2016). Is sharing
   specific autobiographical memories a distinct form of self-disclosure?
   J. Exp. Psychol. 145, 434–450. doi: 10.1037/xge0000143

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Bocincova, A., Nelson, T. A., Johnson, J. S., and Routledge, C. (2019).
   Experimentally induced nostalgia reduces the amplitude of the
   event-related negativity. Soc. Neurosci. 14, 631–634. doi:
   10.1080/17470919.2019.1580612

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Carver, C. S., and White, T. L. (1994). Behavioral inhibition,
   behavioral activation, and affective responses to impending reward and
   punishment: the BIS/BAS Scales. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 67, 319–333.
   doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.67.2.319

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Cheung, W.-Y., Sedikides, C., and Wildschut, T. (2016). Induced
   nostalgia increases optimism (via social-connectedness and self-esteem)
   among individuals high, but not low, in trait nostalgia. Personal.
   Individual Diff. 90, 283–288. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2015.11.028

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Cheung, W.-Y., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Hepper, E. G., Arndt, J.,
   and Vingerhoets, A. J. (2013). Back to the future: nostalgia increases
   optimism. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 39, 1484–1496. doi:
   10.1177/0146167213499187

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Cheung, W. Y., Hepper, E. G., Reid, C. A., Green, J. D., Wildschut, T.,
   and Sedikides, C. (2019). Anticipated nostalgia: looking forward to
   looking back. Cognition Emotion 2, 1–15. doi:
   10.1080/02699931.2019.1649247

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   FioRito, T., Bocincova, A., Johnson, J. S., and Routledge, C. (2020). A
   Follow-Up Examination of Experimentally Induced Nostalgia Reducing ERN.
   Retrieved from: osf.io/6c3uz

   Google Scholar

   Fivush, R. (2008). Remembering and reminiscing: how individual lives
   are constructed in family narratives. Memory Studies 1, 45–54. doi:
   10.1177/1750698007083888

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Juhl, J., Sand, E. C., and Routledge, C. (2012). The effects of
   nostalgia and avoidant attachment on relationship satisfaction and
   romantic motives. J. Soc. Personal Relationships 29, 661–670. doi:
   10.1177/0265407512443433

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Kersten, M., Cox, C. R., and Enkevort, E. A. V. (2016). An exercise in
   nostalgia: nostalgia promotes health optimism and physical activity.
   Psychol. Health 31, 1166–1181. doi: 10.1080/08870446.2016.1185524

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Pasupathi, M., Lucas, S., and Coombs, A. (2002). Conversational
   functions of autobiographical remembering: long-married couples talk
   about conflicts and pleasant topics. Discourse Processes 34, 163–192.
   doi: 10.1207/S15326950DP3402_3

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Routledge, C. (2015). Nostalgia: A Psychological Resource. New York,
   NY: Routledge and Taylor and Francis Group.

   Google Scholar

   Routledge, C., Arndt, J., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Hart, C. M.,
   Juhl, J., et al. (2011). The past makes the present meaningful:
   Nostalgia as an existential resource. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 101,
   638–652. doi: 10.1037/a0024292

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Routledge, C., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., and Juhl, J. (2013).
   Nostalgia as a resource for psychological health and well-being. Soc.
   Personal. Psychol. Compass 7, 808–818. doi: 10.1111/spc3.12070

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Sedikides, C., Cheung, W.-Y., Wildschut, T., Hepper, E. G., Baldursson,
   E., and Pedersen, B. (2017). Nostalgia motivates pursuit of important
   goals by increasing meaning in life. Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 48, 209–216.
   doi: 10.1002/ejsp.2318

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Stephan, E., Sedikides, C., Wildschut, T., Cheung, W.-Y., Routledge,
   C., and Arndt, J. (2015). Nostalgia-evoked inspiration. Personal. Soc.
   Psychol. Bull. 41, 1395–1410. doi: 10.1177/0146167215596985

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Stephan, E., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Zhou, X., He, W., Routledge,
   C., et al. (2014). The mnemonic mover: Nostalgia regulates avoidance
   and approach motivation. Emotion 14, 545–561. doi: 10.1037/a0035673

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Tullett, A. M., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., and Inzlicht, M. (2015).
   Right-frontal cortical asymmetry predicts increased proneness to
   nostalgia. Psychophysiology 52, 990–996. doi: 10.1111/psyp.12438

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Routledge, C., Arndt, J., and Cordaro, F.
   (2010). Nostalgia as a repository of social connectedness: the role of
   attachment-related avoidance. J. Personal. Soc. Psychol. 98, 573–586.
   doi: 10.1037/a0017597

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Zhou, X., Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Shi, K., and Feng, C. (2012).
   Nostalgia: the gift that keeps on giving. J. Consumer Res. 39, 39–50.
   doi: 10.1086/662199

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Keywords: nostalgia, shared nostalgia, motivation, self-regulation,
   social cognition

   Citation: FioRito TA and Routledge C (2020) Is Nostalgia a Past or
   Future-Oriented Experience? Affective, Behavioral, Social Cognitive,
   and Neuroscientific Evidence. Front. Psychol. 11:1133. doi:
   10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01133

   Received: 26 March 2020; Accepted: 04 May 2020;
   Published: 03 June 2020.

   Edited by:
   Jeffrey D. Green, Virginia Commonwealth University, United States

   Reviewed by:
   Krystine Irene Batcho, Le Moyne College, United States

   Copyright © 2020 FioRito and Routledge. This is an open-access article
   distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License
   (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is
   permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s)
   are credited and that the original publication in this journal is
   cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,
   distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with
   these terms.

   *Correspondence: Taylor A. FioRito, taylor.fiorito@ndus.edu

This article is part of the Research Topic

   Current Issues in Nostalgia Research
   View all 13 Articles

People also looked at

   Download
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-7">
<text>
   ﻿

   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-MLL5DL

   (BUTTON) Menu
   Everyday Health Logo
   (BUTTON) Newsletters (BUTTON) Search
   Health Conditions A-Z
     * Alopecia Areata
     * Breast Cancer
     * Cancer
     * Cold &amp; Flu
     * Coronavirus / COVID-19
     * Crohn's Disease
     * Depression
     * Eczema (Atopic Dermatitis)
     * Hemorrhoids
     * High Blood Pressure
     * IBS
     * Multiple Sclerosis
     * Psoriasis
     * Rheumatoid Arthritis
     * Type 2 Diabetes
     * Ulcerative Colitis
     * See All

   Wellness
     * Best Oils for Skin
     * Complementary Approaches
     * Emotional Wellness
     * Fitness and Exercise
     * Healthy Skin
     * Online Therapy
     * Reiki Healing
     * Resilience
     * Sleep
     * Sexual Health
     * Self Care
     * Yoga Poses
     * See All

   Food &amp; Diet
     * Atkins Diet
     * DASH Diet
     * Golo Diet
     * Green Tea
     * Healthy Recipes
     * Intermittent Fasting
     * Intuitive Eating
     * Jackfruit
     * Ketogenic Diet
     * Low-Carb Diet
     * Mediterranean Diet
     * MIND Diet
     * Paleo Diet
     * Plant-Based Diet
     * See All

   Video
     * Cancer
     * Coronavirus
     * Diabetes
     * Diet &amp; Nutrition
     * Emotional Health
     * Fitness
     * Multiple Sclerosis
     * Psoriasis
     * See All

   Drugs
     * Albuterol Inhalation (Ventolin)
     * Amoxicillin (Amoxil)
     * Azithromycin (Zithromax)
     * CoQ10 (Coenzyme Q-10)
     * Ibuprofen (Advil)
     * Levothyroxine (Synthroid)
     * Lexapro (Escitalopram)
     * Lipitor (Atorvastatin)
     * Lisinopril (Zestril)
     * Norvasc (Amlodipine)
     * Prilosec (Omeprazole)
     * Vitamin D3
     * Xanax (Alprazolam)
     * Zoloft (Sertraline)
     * Drug Reviews
     * See All

   Health Tools
     * Body Type Quiz
     * Find a Doctor - EverydayHealth Care
     * Hydration Calculator
     * Menopause Age Calculator
     * Symptom Checker

   News &amp; Alerts
     * See All

   [image-src-placeholder-16x9288625876.png]

ER Visits Due to Alcohol Use Raise the Risk of Death Within a Year

   [image-src-placeholder-16x9288625876.png]

Why Do Some Black Women Have More Aggressive Breast Cancer Than White Women?

   DailyOM Courses
     * Body Courses
     * Mind Courses
     * Heart Courses
     * Spirit Courses
     * See All

   Tippi logo - get and share tips

   Emotional Health

5 Ways Nostalgia Is Good for Your Health (and When It's Not)

   Fleeting memories from your past don’t just bring on warm and fuzzy
   feelings — they could influence your mental health and personal growth.
   Moira Lawler
   By Moira LawlerMedically Reviewed by Seth Gillihan, PhD
   Reviewed: October 20, 2022

   Medically Reviewed
   (BUTTON)
   Nostalgically looking through photo album Nostalgically looking through
   photo album
   Much of the time looking back fondly on past memories can boost
   well-being, but you should know the warning signs of when it
   doesn’t. Getty Images

   It’s common to sometimes find yourself longing for the past — to think
   back on your childhood or early adulthood and wistfully recall memories
   that leave you feeling warm and fuzzy. That’s called nostalgia.

   “It’s the positive, wistful, or longing sentiment that one experiences
   when they are reminded of something from the past,” says Deanna
   Woodhouse, a licensed marriage and family therapist and director of
   clinical operations at Los Angeles–based Lightfully Behavioral Health.
   Nostalgia could come about by looking at an old photograph, talking
   with a friend, or smelling a familiar scent.

   Is feeling nostalgic good for your health?

   It’s a question psychologists are particularly interested in. “It can
   influence people's well-being,” says David Newman, PhD, a postdoctoral
   scholar in the department of psychiatry and behavioral sciences at the
   University of California San Francisco School of Medicine, who studies
   nostalgia.

   It comes up clinically as well. “Sometimes when a client needs a
   grounding point, we will discuss things they look back upon fondly and
   draw upon the nostalgia experience,” Woodhouse says. “Nostalgia can be
   beneficial when dealing with dark times and reminding clients there was
   once light.”

5 Ways Feeling Nostalgic Is Good for You

   In a review published in February 2020 in the Journal of Personality
   and Social Psychology, researchers (including Dr. Newman) concluded
   that thinking back on your memories is primarily a positive experience,
   and that nostalgia, practicing nostalgia, or the act of feeling
   nostalgic was more commonly linked to positive markers of health (like
   meaning in life, self-esteem, and optimism) than negative ones. But the
   researchers did note that it’s a mixed emotion, and does not always
   have positive effects on people.

   Here are five benefits linked to nostalgia:

1. It May Promote Sense of Self

   Reminiscing about the past can help you feel connected to who you were
   in the past, who you are in the present, and who you will be in the
   future, according to a study published in June 2021 in the journal
   Cognition and Emotion.

   “If you are fondly recalling memories that align with your values and
   morals, this can affirm movement toward those ideas,” Woodhouse says.
   “This would definitely increase the sense of self and motivate
   confidence.” She adds that oftentimes thinking back on your former self
   reunites you with your values and what truly matters to you.

2. It Can Serve as a Barometer for Personal Growth

   Nostalgia can also show you how far you’ve come. “Change doesn’t happen
   overnight,” Woodhouse says. “When we can draw upon those positive
   experiences and reflect upon our own growth, nostalgia can be a good
   barometer to gauge how we have stayed aligned with our own values
   (which may change over time, and that's okay) and our authentic
   selves.”

   She says looking back at the past can help you see where you have
   evolved and how you’ve grown into who you are in the present.

3. It May Boost Mood

   Nostalgia can lead to a positive affect, according to a study published
   April 2021 in Consciousness and Cognition. If you’re feeling bogged
   down by negativity, dipping into nostalgic feelings could help
   alleviate those emotions temporarily.

   “This can allow someone who is highly dysregulated to calm themselves
   down and utilize healthy coping mechanisms,” Woodhouse says. Recalling
   positive memories can transition emotions from negative to neutral — or
   even positive, Woodhouse says. After all, it's common to feel a little
   boost from thinking back to happy Little League memories or how
   satisfied you felt eating your grandma’s famous cherry pie as a kid.

   In fact, research suggests that feelings of nostalgia increased during
   COVID-19 quarantines, serving as a comfort during isolating times,
   according to a review article published in 2021 in the Journal of
   Nervous and Mental Disease.

4. It May Help Strengthen Bonds With Friends and Family

   According to a study published in April 2021 in the journal Emotion,
   nostalgia is a highly social emotion that connects us to others. Based
   on a series of five experiments, the researchers concluded that
   nostalgia can be used as a way to facilitate "help seeking behavior" by
   fostering social connectedness.

   Reminiscing with family and friends, watching home videos, or viewing
   photos from the past can help you feel closer and more connected, other
   research suggests. And it works even if you’re complete strangers and
   connecting over shared experiences from the past, such as Millennials
   relating over '90s cartoons and dial-up connections, Woodhouse says.
   "Nostalgia can unify our experiences."

5. It Could Make You More Optimistic

   The aforementioned February 2020 paper from the Journal of Personality
   and Social Psychology noted that nostalgia can increase optimism. This
   is rooted in the fact that, oftentimes, reminiscing about fond memories
   brings us back to happy times. “When we remember good times or
   reexperience love, it can remind us of feeling successful and
   accomplished,” Woodhouse says.

   Optimism is having the ability to think positively of the future, and
   recalling moments that made you feel courageous, happy, successful, or
   any other positive emotion gives you an optimistic lens to see the
   future through, Woodhouse says. “This can help us live each day to the
   fullest or even help us see the beauty that is in everyday life,” she
   says.

The Potential Downside of Nostalgia

   Most of the time when someone talks about nostalgia, they’re referring
   to personal nostalgia, or longing for moments they’ve experienced in
   their own life. As mentioned, this experience is generally positive,
   but it can bring on sadness, too.

   Newman calls it a mixed emotion. Anticipatory nostalgia, for instance,
   which is missing the present while you’re still living it, can result
   in sadness, according to a study published May 2020 in Frontiers in
   Psychology. Anticipatory nostalgia is defined in the paper as the
   “premature missing of what is still present” and “future loss.”

   Nostalgia can also induce sadness if you’re yearning for the past, and
   upset that the times you’re thinking of no longer exist. “When you long
   for a time in your past, it can make you miss that time,” Newman says.

   Woodhouse has seen this as well. “When we start to reminisce on the
   ‘good old days’ and begin to linger in the past, we can ruminate on the
   ‘what ifs’ and ‘should haves,’ which can lead to depression,” she says.

   Whether the experience of nostalgia will be positive or negative can
   depend on how it’s introduced. The same 2020 study published in the
   Journal of Personality and Social Psychology that suggested nostalgia
   can boost optimism also found that it is more closely linked with
   sadness if the nostalgia was unprompted and came up organically during
   the day. But it’s more positive if you’re specifically asked to
   reminisce.

   In addition to personal nostalgia, there’s historical or collective
   nostalgia, which is a longing for a time in history that you did not
   personally experience, according to the American Psychological
   Association.

   “For example, you could feel nostalgic for the renaissance era even
   though you never lived during that time,” Newman says.

   Historical nostalgia can be dangerous, however, if someone in power
   uses it to push society back toward negative concepts and practices,
   such as racism or discrimination. Newman adds that there can also be a
   positive side to historical nostalgia in that it can lead to a greater
   sense of connectedness. “So there could be some benefits and harmful
   consequences, too,” he says.
   Mental Wellness Mental Wellness
   NEWSLETTERS

Sign up for our Mental Wellness Newsletter!

   Enter your email
   ____________________
   (BUTTON) Subscribe

   By subscribing you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

The Latest in Emotional Health

Should You Pull the Plug on Social Media? Weighing the Pros and Cons

   Tom Holland, Selena Gomez, and Chrissy Tiegen took a break. Here’s what
   you should know about whether, when, and how a digital detox can be
   good for you...
   By Becky UphamDecember 16, 2022

All About Kindness: Definition, Health Benefits, and How to Be a Kinder
Person

   By Michele Lent HirschDecember 15, 2022

How Did the Pandemic Change Kids’ Brains? A Family Therapist Weighs In

   It’s the brain’s way of saying, ‘I’m not caught up yet; this is all
   going too fast,’ says Amanda Craig, PhD.
   By Maia Niguel Hoskin, PhDDecember 15, 2022

Are You Starting a Diet for the Right Reasons?

   Here are 5 questions to ask yourself before dramatically changing your
   eating habits to know that you’re emotionally ready, and making the
   best nutrition...
   By Jessica MigalaDecember 13, 2022

‘Why Last Year’s Wins Are Helping Me Write This New Year’s Resolutions’

   By Sandhira Wijayaratne, MDDecember 13, 2022

7 Tips for How to Spend Less Time on Your Phone (and More Time Being Present)
This Holiday Season

   Would you rather make more time for festive gatherings and loved ones —
   or your devices?
   By Nicole LaMarcoDecember 12, 2022

How Not to Be Sad: 9 Tips for Managing the Emotion

   The goal isn’t to not feel sad; it’s to understand what’s causing the
   sadness and learn and grow from it.
   By Emily P.G. EricksonDecember 12, 2022

Sesame Care Review: Online Therapy on Demand

   Sesame can connect you to a whole health team through its virtual
   platform. We reviewed Sesame Care to detail its services, costs, and
   membership perks...
   By Vanessa LingDecember 6, 2022

BetterHelp Reviews: Pricing and Plans in 2022

   Looking for an affordable and accessible online counseling platform?
   BetterHelp is a convenient virtual therapy option for people who want
   to interact...
   By Sara LindbergDecember 5, 2022

Talkspace vs. BetterHelp: Comparing the Two Online Therapy Platforms

   Which is better: Talkspace or BetterHelp? That depends on what you’re
   looking for. We’ve reviewed the costs, services, and plans of each
   online therapy...
   By Hillary EamesDecember 5, 2022
   MORE IN

How to Do a Digital Detox Without Unplugging Full Stop

Is Home Cooking Really Good for the Soul? Science Says Yes

All About Fear: How It’s Connected to Health and How to Face the Ones You
Have

Wellness inspired. Wellness enabled.

   (BUTTON) Facebook (BUTTON) Twitter (BUTTON) Instagram (BUTTON)
   Pinterest (BUTTON) Youtube (BUTTON) TikTok
     * About Us
     * Careers
     * Editorial Policy
     * Newsletters
     * Meet Our Health Expert Network
     * Privacy Policy
     * Health News
     * Accessibility Statement
     * Terms of Use
     * Contact Us
     * Feedback
     * Do Not Sell My Personal Information
     * Popular Topics
     * Sitemap
     * AdChoices AdChoice AdChoice

   NEWSLETTERS

Get the best in health and wellness

   Enter your email
   ____________________
   (BUTTON) Subscribe

   By subscribing you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.
   A PROPERTY OF Everyday Health Group Everyday Health Group EHGLogo
   More From Everyday Health: Castle Connolly Top DoctorsDailyOMDiabetes
   DailyEveryday Health CareMigraine Again
   Everyday Health supports Group Black and its mission to increase
   greater diversity in media voices and media ownership.
   © 1996-2022 Everyday Health, Inc., a Ziff Davis company. All rights
   reserved. Everyday Health is among the federally registered trademarks
   of Everyday Health, Inc. and may not be used by third parties without
   explicit permission.
   HON code HON code Badges Tag Seal Tag Seal Badges TRUSTe Verified
   Privacy TRUSTe Verified Privacy Badges
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-8">
<text>
   #alternate alternate alternate alternate alternate alternate alternate
   alternate alternate

   IFRAME: //www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-NW5PKS

   Skip to main content

   (BUTTON) Mobile Navigation

   Psychology Today
     * Find a Therapist
       Find a Therapist
       (Search)
       (BUTTON) Therapists
          + Therapists
          + Treatment Centers
          + Support Groups
       (BUTTON) x
       _________________________ (Search)
       International Therapists : Login | Sign Up
       International
          + Australia
          + Austria
          + Belgium
          + Canada
          + Denmark
          + Hong Kong
          + Ireland
          + New Zealand
          + Singapore
          + South Africa
          + Sweden
          + Switzerland
          + United Kingdom
          + United States
     * Get Help
       Mental Health
          + Addiction
          + Anxiety
          + ADHD
          + Asperger's
          + Autism
          + Bipolar Disorder
          + Chronic Pain
          + Depression
          + Eating Disorders
       Personality
          + Passive Aggression
          + Personality
          + Shyness
       Personal Growth
          + Goal Setting
          + Happiness
          + Positive Psychology
          + Stopping Smoking
       Relationships
          + Low Sexual Desire
          + Relationships
          + Sex
       Family Life
          + Child Development
          + Parenting
       View Help Index
       Do I Need Help?
          + Self Tests
          + Therapy Center
            NEW
       Recently Diagnosed?
          + Diagnosis Dictionary
          + Types of Therapy
       Talk to Someone
          + Find a Therapist
          + Find a Treatment Center
          + Find a Support Group
     * Magazine
       Current
       November 2022 magazine cover
       November 2022
       Did I Really Just Say That?
       Our conversations are sprinkled with slips, pauses, lies, and clues
       to our inner world. Here’s what we reveal when we speak, whether we
       mean to or not.
       Subscribe
       Recent
       September 2022 magazine cover
       July 2022 magazine cover
       May 2022 magazine cover
       March 2022 magazine cover
       Issue Archive
     * Today

News
          + Research Reveals 25 Risk Factors for Childhood Abuse
          + The Worsening Mental Health of Young People
          + How Women Recover Their Sexuality After Childbirth
          + The Science of Choosing Between Cooperation and Competition
       Essential Reads
          +
        Collecting: A Demonic Passion
          +
        A Parents’ Guide to Pediatric Anxiety Screening
          +
        Why the Fusion Breakthrough Could Make Climate Change Worse
          +
        How Flirting Can Harm a Committed Relationship
       Trending Topics
          + Coronavirus Disease 2019
          + Narcissism
          + Dementia
          + Bias
          + Affective Forecasting
          + Neuroscience

See All

   intl
   Search
   Search
   Search _______________
   Search
   ____________________ (Search)

   Verified by Psychology Today

   Neel Burton M.D.
   Neel Burton M.D.
   Hide and Seek

The Meaning of Nostalgia

The psychology and philosophy of nostalgia.

   Posted November 27, 2014
     * Share on Facebook Share
     * Share on Twitter Tweet
     * Share via Email Email

   [Article revised on 24 March 2020.]
   Wikicommons
   Source: Wikicommons

   Nostalgia is sentimentality for the past, typically for a particular
   period or place with positive associations, but sometimes also for the
   past in general, ‘the good old days of yore’.

   At the end of André Brink’s novel, An Instant in the Wind, Adam says,
   ‘The land which happened inside us no one can take away from us again,
   not even ourselves.’ Nostalgia combines the sadness of loss with the
   joy or consolation that the loss is not complete, nor ever can be.
   Mortal though we are, whatever little life we have snared from the
   legions of death is forever ours.

   ‘Nostalgia’ is a portmanteau neologism coined in 1688 by Swiss medical
   student Johannes Hofer, from the Greek nóstos [homecoming] and álgos
   [pain, ache]. Nóstos is, of course, the overarching theme of Homer’s
   Odyssey, in which, in the aftermath of the Trojan War, Odysseus strives
   to return to Penelope and Telemachus and his native Ithaca.

   In Virgil’s Æneid, Æneas, another survivor of the Trojan War and an
   ancestor of Romulus and Remus, gazes upon a Carthaginian mural
   depicting battles of the Trojan War. Mourning the loss of his Trojan
   kin, he cries out, sunt lacrimae rerum et mentem mortalia tangunt:
   ‘These are the tears of things and mortal things touch the mind.’

   And it’s not just the Greeks and the Trojans. In the Biblical Psalms,
   the Jewish people from their Babylonian captivity lament the loss of
   their homeland, in verses made famous by Boney M:

     By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down/ Yea, we wept, when we
     remembered Zion.

   Hofer coined ‘nostalgia’ to refer to the homesickness of Swiss
   mercenaries fighting in foreign lowlands. Military physicians
   attributed this homesickness, also known as Schweizerheimweh or mal du
   suisse, to ear and brain damage from the constant clanging of cowbells.
   Recognized symptoms included pining for Alpine landscapes, fainting,
   fever, and even, in extremis, death. In the Dictionnaire de musique,
   Jean-Jacques Rousseau claims that Swiss mercenaries were forbidden from
   singing their Swiss songs so as not to aggravate their nostalgia.

   Today, nostalgia is no longer looked upon as a mental disorder, but as
   a natural, common, and even positive emotion, a vehicle for travelling
   beyond the suffocating confines of time and space. Bouts of nostalgia
   are often prompted by thoughts about the past; particular places and
   objects; feelings of loneliness, disconnectedness, or meaninglessness;
   and repeated sounds, smells, tastes, textures, and times of year.

   When I was a child, my English sheepdog Oscar got runover by a tractor
   and had to be put to sleep. Apart from the memories, all I kept from
   him was a tuft of his fur. Like the toys and books of our childhood, or
   our childhood home or bedroom, this tuft of fur became a sort of time
   portal, which, for many years, helped me to reminisce about Oscar.

   I say ‘help’ because nostalgia does have an unexpected number of
   adaptive functions. Our everyday is humdrum, often even absurd.
   Nostalgia can lend us much-needed context, perspective, and direction,
   reminding and reassuring us that our life (and that of others) is not
   as banal as it may seem, that it is rooted in a narrative, and that
   there have been, and will once again be, meaningful moments and
   experiences.

   No surprise, then, that nostalgia is more pronounced in uncertain times
   and times of transition or change. According to one study, it is also
   more common on cold days or in cold rooms, and makes us feel warmer!

   In that much, nostalgia serves a similar function to anticipation,
   which can be defined as enthusiasm and excitement for some expected or
   hoped-for positive event. The hauntings of times gone by, and the
   imaginings of times to come, strengthen us in lesser times.

   It’s a strange thing: the memory of a scene from the distant past,
   haunted by people who have grown up or grown old or are no more, doing
   things that are no longer done in a world that no longer exists. And
   yet it all seems so vivid in our minds that we can still see the glint
   in their eyes or the twitch at the corner of their mouths. Sometimes we
   even say their names under our breath as if that could magically bring
   them back to us.

   Nostalgia is nothing if not paradoxical. In supplying us with substance
   and texture, it also reminds us of their lack and, in the reminding,
   moves us to compensation. Unfortunately, this compensation often takes
   the form of spending, and marketers exploit nostalgia to sell us
   everything from music and clothes to cars and houses.

   It could be argued that nostalgia is a form of self-deception in that
   it invariably involves distortion and idealization of the past, not
   least because the bad or boring bits are erased from our memory,
   leaving only the peak experiences. The Romans had a tag for the
   phenomenon that psychologists have come to call ‘rosy retrospection’:
   memoria præteritorum bonorum, ‘the past is always well remembered’.

   If overindulged, nostalgia can give rise to a utopia that never existed
   and never can exist, but that is pursued at all costs, sapping all life
   and joy and potential from the present. For many people, paradise is
   not so much a place to go to as the place (they think) they came from.

   Nostalgia can be fruitfully compared with a number of similar or
   related concepts, including saudade, mono no aware, wabi-sabi, and
   Sehnsucht.

   Saudade is a Portuguese and Galician word for the love and longing for
   someone or something that has been lost and may never be regained. It
   is the desolate incompleteness or wistful dreaminess that can be felt
   even in the presence of its object, when that presence is threatened or
   incomplete—as, for example, in the famous final scene of Cinema
   Paradiso. The rise of saudade coincided with the decline of Portugal
   and the yen for its imperial heyday, a yen so strong as to have been
   written into the national anthem: Levantai hoje de novo o esplendor de
   Portugal [‘Let us once again lift up the splendour of Portugal’].

   An epitome of mono no aware is the annual blossoming of cherry trees.
   The literal translation, from Japanese, of mono no aware is ‘the pathos
   of things’. Coined in the eighteenth century by Motoori Norinaga for
   his literary criticism of the Tale of Genjii, it refers to a heightened
   consciousness of the transience of things coupled with an acute
   appreciation of their ephemeral beauty and a gentle sadness or
   wistfulness at their passing—and, by extension, at the realization,
   reminder, or truth that all things must pass. Although beauty itself is
   eternal in its recurrence, its particular manifestations are unique
   insofar as they, and we the observer, cannot be preserved or
   replicated.

   Related to mono no aware is wabi-sabi, an æsthetic of impermanence and
   imperfection rooted in Zen Buddhism. Wabi-sabi calls upon the
   acceptance and espousal of transience and inadequacy to foster a sense
   of serene melancholy and spiritual longing, and, with it, liberation
   from the material and mundane distractions of everyday life. Hagi pots
   with their pockmarked surfaces, cracked glaze, and signature chip are
   an embodiment of wabi-sabi. With age, the pots take on deeper tones and
   become even more fragile and unique. Objects in our everyday lives that
   can be wabi-sabi include stone buildings, wooden floorboards, leather
   goods, books, and clothes.

   Sehnsucht is German for ‘longing’ or ‘craving’. It is dissatisfaction
   with an imperfect reality paired with the yearning for an ideal that
   comes to seem more real than the reality itself, as in the final lines
   of Walt Whitman’s Song of the Universal:

     Is it a dream?/ Nay, but the lack of it the dream/ And, failing it,
     life’s lore and wealth a dream/ And all the world a dream.

   CS Lewis called Sehnsucht ‘the inconsolable longing in the heart for we
   know not what’. In the Pilgrim’s Regress, he describes the feeling as:
   ‘that unnameable something, desire for which pierces us like a rapier
   at the smell of bonfire, the sound of wild ducks flying overhead, the
   title of the The Well at the World’s End, the opening lines of Kubla
   Khan, the morning cobwebs in late summer, or the noise of falling
   waves.’

   Lewis redefines this feeling as ‘joy’, which he understands as ‘an
   unsatisfied desire which is itself more desirable than any other
   satisfaction’. The paradox of ‘joy’ arises from the self-defeating
   nature of human desire, which might be thought of as nothing more than
   a desire for desire, a longing for longing.

   In The Weight of Glory, Lewis illustrates this from the age-old quest
   for beauty:

     The books or the music in which we thought the beauty was located
     will betray us if we trust to them; it was not in them, it only came
     through them, and what came through them was longing. These
     things—the beauty, the memory of our own past—are good images of
     what we really desire; but if they are mistaken for the thing itself
     they turn into dumb idols, breaking the hearts of their worshippers.
     For they are not the thing itself; they are only the scent of a
     flower we have not found, the echo of a tune we have not heard, news
     from a country we have not visited.

   Neel Burton is author of Heaven and Hell: The Psychology of the
   Emotions and other books.

   References

   Bible, OT, Psalms 137 (KJV).

   A Brink (1975), An Instant in the Wind.

   Virgil, Aeneid, 1.461 ff.

   JJ Rousseau (1767), Dictionnaire de musique.

   Zhou X et al. (2012): Heartwarming memories: Nostalgia maintains
   physiological comfort. Emotion 12(4):700.

   W Whitman, Song of the Universal, final verses.

   CS Lewis, The Pilgrim’s Regress, afterword to the third edition(1944).

   CS Lewis (1941), The Weight of Glory.
   (BUTTON) More references
     * Share on Facebook Share
     * Share on Twitter Tweet
     * Share via Email Email

   advertisement
   About the Author
   Neel Burton M.D.

   Neel Burton, M.D., is a psychiatrist, philosopher, and writer who lives
   and teaches in Oxford, England.
   Online:
   neelburton.com, Facebook, Twitter
   Read Next
   3 Key Elements of a Fulfilling Life
   The Psychology of Gift Giving

   advertisement
   Most Popular

   16 Signs You Were Raised by a Highly Critical Parent

   When Your Romantic Partner Is a Psychopath: 5 Core Themes

   3 Unmet Basic Needs and Their Effects on Our Relationships

   Stop Looking for Your Authentic Self

   The Simple Technique That Relieved My Anxiety and Depression

   5 Science-Based Tips to Boost Self-Motivation
   advertisement
   Find a Therapist

   Get the help you need from a therapist near you–a FREE service from
   Psychology Today.
   City or Postcode ____________________ (Search)
   Counselling
   Countries:
     * Australia
     * Austria
     * Belgium
     * Canada
     * Denmark
     * Hong Kong
     * Ireland
     * New Zealand
     * Singapore
     * South Africa
     * Sweden
     * Switzerland
     * United Kingdom
     * United States

   Are you a Therapist? Get Listed Today

   Psychology Today
   Facebook
   Twitter
   Instagram

   Recent Issues
   November 2022 magazine cover
   September 2022 magazine cover
   July 2022 magazine cover
   May 2022 magazine cover
   March 2022 magazine cover
   January 2022 magazine cover
   Subscribe Today
     * About
     * Editorial Process
     * Privacy
     * Terms
     * Accessibility

   International International

   Psychology Today © 2022 Sussex Publishers, LLC
   Back
   Psychology Today
     * Home
     * Find a Therapist
     * Get Help
     * Magazine
     * Today

   Back

Find a Therapist

     * Get Help
     * Find a Therapist
     * Find a Treatment Center
     * Find a Support Group

     * Members
     * Login
     * Sign Up

     * International
     * Australia
     * Austria
     * Belgium
     * Canada
     * Denmark
     * Hong Kong
     * Ireland
     * New Zealand
     * Singapore
     * South Africa
     * Sweden
     * Switzerland

   Back

Get Help

   Mental Health
     * Addiction
     * Anxiety
     * ADHD
     * Asperger's
     * Autism
     * Bipolar Disorder
     * Chronic Pain
     * Depression
     * Eating Disorders

   Personality
     * Passive Aggression
     * Personality
     * Shyness

   Personal Growth
     * Goal Setting
     * Happiness
     * Positive Psychology
     * Stopping Smoking

   Relationships
     * Low Sexual Desire
     * Relationships
     * Sex

   Family Life
     * Child Development
     * Parenting

   View Help Index
   Do I Need Help?
     * Self Tests
     * Therapy Center
       NEW

   Recently Diagnosed?
     * Diagnosis Dictionary
     * Types of Therapy

   Talk to Someone
     * Find a Therapist
     * Find a Treatment Center
     * Find a Support Group

   Back

Magazine

   November 2022 magazine cover
   November 2022
   Did I Really Just Say That?

   Our conversations are sprinkled with slips, pauses, lies, and clues to
   our inner world. Here’s what we reveal when we speak, whether we mean
   to or not.
   Subscribe Issue Archive
   Back

Today

News

     * Research Reveals 25 Risk Factors for Childhood Abuse
     * The Worsening Mental Health of Young People
     * How Women Recover Their Sexuality After Childbirth

   Essential Reads
     *
   Collecting: A Demonic Passion
     *
   A Parents’ Guide to Pediatric Anxiety Screening
     *
   Why the Fusion Breakthrough Could Make Climate Change Worse
     *
   How Flirting Can Harm a Committed Relationship

   Trending Topics
     * Coronavirus Disease 2019
     * Narcissism
     * Dementia
     * Bias
     * Affective Forecasting
     * Neuroscience

See All
</text>
</page> §
<page="eng-9">
<text>
   IFRAME: https://gtm-server.healthline.com/ns.html?id=GTM-MB6365D

     * Health Conditions
          + Health Conditions
               o Alzheimer's &amp; Dementia
               o Anxiety
               o Arthritis
               o Asthma &amp; Allergies
               o Breast Cancer
               o Cancer
               o Cardiovascular Health
               o COVID-19
               o Dermatology &amp; Skincare
               o Diabetes
               o Environment &amp; Sustainability
               o Exercise &amp; Fitness
               o Eye Health
               o Headache &amp; Migraine
               o Health Equity
               o HIV &amp; AIDS
               o Human Biology
               o Inflammatory Bowel Disease
               o Leukemia
               o LGBTQIA+
               o Men's Health
               o Mental Health
               o Multiple Sclerosis (MS)
               o Nutrition
               o Parkinson's Disease
               o Psoriasis
               o Sexual Health
               o Women's Health
     * Health Products
          + Health Products
               o Nutrition &amp; Fitness
               o Vitamins &amp; Supplements
               o CBD
               o Sleep
               o Mental Health
               o At-Home Testing
               o Men’s Health
               o Women’s Health
     * Discover
          + News
               o Latest News
          + Original Series
               o Medical Myths
               o Honest Nutrition
               o Through My Eyes
               o New Normal Health
          + Podcasts
               o How Viagra became a new 'tool' for young men
               o What makes breast cancer come back?
               o How to understand chronic pain
               o What is behind vaccine hesitancy?
               o The amazing story of hepatitis C, from discovery to cure
               o New directions in dementia research
     * Tools
          + General Health
               o Drugs A-Z
               o Health Hubs
          + Health Tools
               o BMI Calculators and Charts
               o Blood Pressure Chart: Ranges and Guide
               o Breast Cancer: Self-Examination Guide
               o Sleep Calculator
          + Quizzes
               o RA Myths vs Facts
               o Type 2 Diabetes: Managing Blood Sugar
               o Ankylosing Spondylitis Pain: Fact or Fiction
     * Connect
          + About Medical News Today
               o Who We Are
               o Our Editorial Process
               o Content Integrity
               o Conscious Language
          + Newsletters
               o Sign Up
          + Follow Us

   (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON) Health Conditions
     * (BUTTON) Health Products
     * (BUTTON) Discover
     * (BUTTON) Tools
     * (BUTTON) Connect

   (BUTTON) Subscribe

Products and Reviews

     * Nutrition &amp; Fitness
     * Vitamins &amp; supplements
     * CBD
     * Sleep
     * Mental health
     * At-home testing
     * Men's Health
     * Women's Health

   (BUTTON)

Why do we need nostalgia?

   By Maria Cohut, Ph.D. on January 1, 2021

   Nostalgia and homesickness are part and parcel of the human experience.
   Most of us associate them with feelings of sadness and sometimes loss,
   but do they actually play a positive role in the human psyche? Medical
   News Today investigates.
   Share on Pinterestkool99/Getty Images

   The term “nostalgia” originates from Ancient Greek via New Latin, and
   it is a composite of the root words “nostos,” meaning “home,” and
   “algos,” meaning “pain.”

   Essentially, it refers to the pain of being far away from home. The
   first time “nostalgia” came into use was in 17th-century Switzerland,
   when physician Johannes Hofer identified it as a condition specific to
   Swiss mercenary soldiers.

   Hofer identified nostalgia as a disease of the mind, and he described
   its mechanism as below:

     “Nostalgia […] is sympathic of an afflicted imagination. Hence, from
     the living spirits entirely by its own momentum along uncommon
     routes through the untouched courses of the channels of the brain to
     the body, and by revisiting the oval tubes of the center brain, it
     is originated by arousing especially the uncommon and ever-present
     idea of the recalled native land in the mind.”

   Some of the symptoms that accompanied this “affliction” included
   “persistent thinking of home, bouts of weeping, anxiety, irregular
   heartbeat, anorexia, insomnia, and even smothering sensations.” This is
   according to a paper published in 2006 by Profs Tim Wildschut and
   Constantine Sedikides, from the University of Southampton in the United
   Kingdom, and their colleagues.

   Physician J. J. Scheuchzer, who lived and worked around the same time
   as Hofer, had a similar view of nostalgia. However, he argued that it
   was not a result of an internal imbalance of the mind, but a condition
   influenced by external factors.

   According to him, nostalgia was caused by “a sharp differential in
   atmospheric pressure causing excessive body pressurization, which in
   turn drove blood from the heart to the brain, thereby producing the
   observed affliction of sentiment.”

   Nostalgia and homesickness as ‘disorders’

   For many centuries, doctors persisted in understanding nostalgia as a
   state of ill health that required treatment. However, views around its
   mechanisms and typology, as well as around which demographics it
   affected, kept shifting over the years.

   In a paper from 2008, Profs Wildschut, Sedikides, and their colleagues
   note that, throughout the 17th and 18th centuries, doctors thought
   nostalgia only affected the Swiss, since they mostly observed it in the
   Swiss mercenary soldiers that lent their services to foreign armies.

   Prof. Svetlana Boym writes that, at this time, cures for nostalgia
   included “leeches, warm hypnotic emulsions, opium” and returning home,
   to the Alps.

   In the early 19th century, however, physicians had begun to acknowledge
   it as a widespread condition that they saw as a form of melancholy or
   depression.

   Throughout the 20th century, doctors kept changing their minds about
   the nature of nostalgia, though they mostly associated it with
   homesickness, an unhelpful psychological mechanism experienced by
   students and migrants unable to adapt to a new life away from home.

   In their 2008 article, Profs Wildschut, Sedikides, and their colleagues
   explain:

     “By the beginning of the 20th century, nostalgia was regarded as a
     psychiatric disorder. Symptoms included anxiety, sadness, and
     insomnia. By the mid-20th century, psychodynamic approaches
     considered nostalgia a subconscious desire to return to an earlier
     life stage, and it was labeled as a repressive compulsive disorder.
     Soon thereafter, nostalgia was downgraded to a variant of
     depression, marked by loss and grief, though still equated with
     homesickness.”

   In their 2006 article, they also point out that, for much of the 20th
   century, some psychologists viewed nostalgia as an “immigrant
   psychosis,” a “mentally repressive compulsive disorder,” or “a
   regressive manifestation closely related to the issue of loss, grief,
   incomplete mourning, and, finally, depression.”

   According to Profs Wildschut, Sedikides, and their colleagues, in the
   late 20th century, doctors and researchers started to differentiate
   between nostalgia and homesickness.

   They suggest homesickness became conflated with mental health issues,
   such as separation anxiety, whereas nostalgia began to be associated
   with idealized images of childhood or past happy times.

   What are the benefits of nostalgia?

   So is nostalgia — and even homesickness — a sign that a person is
   unable to adapt to a new life, new surroundings, or the realities of
   adult life? Or does it also play a positive role in the human psyche?

   Physicians no longer treat nostalgia as a disorder, but the phenomenon
   continues to interest researchers.

   Profs Wildschut, Sedikides, and their colleagues sought to learn more
   about this mental state in a series of studies conducted in 2006.

   One study, based on the self-reported experiences of the participants,
   indicated that nostalgia is, by and large, “a positively toned and
   self-relevant emotion that is often associated with the recall of
   experiences involving interactions with important others or of
   momentous life events.”

   Nostalgic memories, the researchers found, often contained a mixture of
   happiness and sadness that ultimately came together to form a
   constructive narrative:

     “Although most narratives contained negative as well as positive
     elements, these elements were often juxtaposed so as to form a
     redemption sequence — a narrative pattern that progresses from a
     negative to a positive or triumphant life scene.”

   A second study confirmed that nostalgia helps form a constructive
   narrative of meaningful events from the past, but it also identified
   some of the most common triggers of nostalgia.

   According to the researchers, most participants experienced nostalgia
   when faced with difficult life situations, such as present worries and
   anxieties. This suggested that casting their minds back to a happier or
   more meaningful time helped participants cope with present
   uncertainties.

   “Chief among the perceived benefits of nostalgia were its capacity to
   generate positive affect, bolster social bonds, and increase positive
   self-regard,” Profs Wildschut, Sedikides, and their colleagues write.

   Further research reveals other ways that nostalgia can be beneficial.
   For example, a 2012 paper reports that this mental state can help
   increase a person’s willingness to help others, thanks to the fact that
   it strengthens the sense of social connectedness.

   According to Dr. Krystine Batcho — professor of psychology at LeMoyne
   College in Syracuse, NY — nostalgia also helps strengthen a person’s
   identity, their sense of self.

   In an interview for the American Psychological Association, she asserts
   that “nostalgia is an emotional experience that unifies,” that “helps
   unite our sense of who we are, our self, our identity over time,” and
   “gives us a sense of who we want to be […] in the future.”

   Most recently, in June 2020, Dr. Andrew Abeyta — from The State
   University of New Jersey in Camden — and his colleagues show that
   indulging in nostalgic thinking can help reduce the negative
   psychological impact of loneliness.

   “Based on the current research, stopping the cycle of loneliness may
   involve looking to the past for confidence and encouragement,” the
   researchers conclude.

   So when our minds fall back on cherished memories of the past, it may
   be best to allow ourselves this bittersweet experience.
     * Depression
     * Mental Health
     * Psychology / Psychiatry

   Share this article
   By Maria Cohut, Ph.D. on January 1, 2021

Latest news

     * Artificial sweetener aspartame linked to anxiety, mice study finds
     * Alzheimer's: Brain protein offers clues about higher risk in older
       women
     * Talquetamab: New drug may offer hope for those with hard-to-treat
       blood cancer
     * Researchers identify insulin-mimicking molecule that could treat
       diabetes
     * 'Sticky' cholesterol and hypertension may increase heart attack,
       stroke risk

Related Coverage

     * Can scientists 'hack' memory?
       Is it possible to manipulate memory formation and consolidation?
       And why would we want to do it? We explore these questions in this
       Spotlight feature.
       READ MORE
     *
     * Synesthesia: Hearing colors and tasting sounds
       People with synesthesia experience unique perceptual cross-overs,
       such as associating letters or sounds to colors. Learn more about
       it in this…
       READ MORE
     * How language shapes our brains...and our lives
       In this Spotlight, we look at the origins of spoken language, where
       language is present in the brain, and how the languages we speak
       shape our world.
       READ MORE
     * How can we overcome loneliness?
       Loneliness is an epidemic and a major risk factor for premature
       death, recent research suggests. So what can we do to prevent and
       overcome it?
       READ MORE
     * Can pessimism be beneficial?
       Is your glass always half empty? Do you expect negative outcomes?
       As a pessimist, you may have more advantages than you think. Read
       on to learn more.
       READ MORE

     * About Us
     * Contact Us
     * Terms of Use
     * Privacy Policy
     * Privacy Settings
     * Advertising Policy

     * Health Topics
     * Health Hubs
     * Medical Affairs
     * Content Integrity
     * Newsletters
     * © 2004-2022 Healthline Media UK Ltd, Brighton, UK, a Red Ventures
       Company. All rights reserved. MNT is the registered trade mark of
       Healthline Media. Any medical information published on this website
       is not intended as a substitute for informed medical advice and you
       should not take any action before consulting with a healthcare
       professional. See additional information.

   © 2004-2022 Healthline Media UK Ltd, Brighton, UK, a Red Ventures
   Company. All rights reserved. MNT is the registered trade mark of
   Healthline Media. Any medical information published on this website is
   not intended as a substitute for informed medical advice and you should
   not take any action before consulting with a healthcare professional.
   See additional information.
   AboutCareersAdvertise with us

   OUR BRANDS
   HealthlineMedical News TodayGreatistPsych Central
</text>
</page> §
</lang>
