   #RSS Feed

   Home
   About
   Work With Me
   Contact
   Book Notes
   Best Articles
   Newsletter
   Free Ebook

Alex J. Hughes

   Home
   About
   Work With Me
   Contact
   Book Notes
   Best Articles
   Newsletter
   Free Ebook
   Nostalgia: A Beautiful Suffering
   September 27, 2014
   Culture
   Alex Hughes
   Nostalgia: A Beautiful Suffering

   Alex Hughes
   September 27, 2014
   Culture

Nostalgia: A Beautiful Suffering

   Alex Hughes
   September 27, 2014
   Culture

   Nostalgia can be many things. It’s the feeling of the first spring day
   when the sun starts to warm your bones after a long winter, reminding
   you of the endless possibilities of the impending summer. Nostalgia is
   the song you set to repeat and belted out with the windows down on your
   first road trip, free from your parents. It’s also the song that was
   the soundtrack to an early heartbreak, whose lyrics rang truer than
   even your own words. Nostalgia is passing a stranger who wears the same
   fragrance as an old love, casting you back into a storm of unfiltered
   emotion you thought you’d overcome. Much like it’s also the music that
   repaints a perfect picture of the sunlight catching her eyes in a
   moment where your entire world was completely calm.

   The common definition of nostalgia is a variation of: “A sentimental
   longing or wistful affection for the past, typically for a period or
   place with happy personal associations.” However, this doesn’t quite do
   the concept justice. It’s better described as an emotional
   connectedness to part of your younger self. This connection is
   rekindled, often without warning, by sensory experiences of the
   surrounding world, unlocking the floodgates to past emotions.
   Many view nostalgia as a crippling inertia that should be avoided at
   all costs. It is incredibly powerful and if given the opportunity, has
   the potential to stop you dead in your tracks. However, in small doses
   there’s a certain beauty to it. It can ignite moments of reflection,
   inspiration, and reconnect us to both our younger self and others.
   Creative minds seem more prone to nostalgia because we have a tendency
   to romanticize the past - not just the good, but the bad, heartbreak
   and all. We don’t necessarily long for that situation, but rather the
   raw emotion. Moments of nostalgia take us back to memories of the
   extremes, heartbreak and bliss, often the best reminders that we’re
   alive. We certainly prefer the highs, but the lows are just as much a
   part of life. One without the other leaves us without context or
   perspective. We can make decisions that allow us to achieve a certain
   level of equilibrium, but this leaves much to be desired. At times we
   need to feel the rise and fall of the waves.
   Regardless of the sentiment attached, nostalgia leaves us with a
   strange feeling somewhere between pleasure and the sharp sting of pain.
   It’s bittersweet. We ache to reconnect with our younger self, which can
   be for a handful of reasons. The one consistency in these moments is a
   desire to feel.
   If there were such a thing as a purest form of nostalgia, it would be
   those connections that lead back to childhood. Most of us associate
   memories of our childhood with innocence and joy. Times before we knew
   deception, brokenness, or the weight of responsibility. Nostalgia
   linked to childhood reveals that we were fortunate enough to have one.
   It shows gratitude and affection for that period of life.
   As we grow older, we insist on further complicating our lives. The
   realization that we can’t turn back the pages and achieve this level of
   naivety is what hurts. These moments are reminders of how important
   childhood is and that we should do our best to afford future
   generations the same privilege.
   Nostalgia that leads back to past relationships is similar in the sense
   that it reconnects us with a younger, more naïve version of ourselves,
   but can be much different in the range of emotions recalled. This
   covers the entire spectrum: anger, peace, resentment, forgiveness,
   happiness, sorrow, and everything in between. We can find pleasure in
   all these as they relate to love felt, love lost, or the realization
   that we’ve grown since. There’s a certain satisfaction in realizing
   lessons, once we’re far enough removed to look back.
   The happiness we find in nostalgia that leads to memories of love needs
   little explanation, as it’s one of our most basic desires. Love lost,
   on the other hand, is the most intriguing as to how we can possibly be
   nostalgic for these moments. Most of us don’t regularly desire to feel
   wrecked. However, sadness and despair are such powerful emotions, that
   it truly makes us feel. It can bring slight gratification because it’s
   a reminder of what it’s like to feel something so deeply, proving both
   our delicateness and resilience.
   Nostalgia can stir up any memory under the sun, not just childhood or
   relationships. It connects us back to achievements, adventures,
   experiences, friendships, and places; the list is inexhaustible. The
   triggers for these connections are even more diverse and unique to each
   of us. The only universal truth to nostalgia is its unusual blend
   between happiness and melancholy. However, a desire to turn back time
   and live briefly in that moment isn’t an inherently bad thing. It
   allows us to revisit a small part of our past and consider what makes
   us the person we are today.
   Moments of nostalgia also offer a powerful tool for creative minds. To
   create something influential that touches the lives of others, you need
   to establish an emotional connection in some way. Sometimes it demands
   that you dig deep and embrace nostalgia to revive the emotion
   surrounding a situation. If you’re able to peel back the layers and
   explore why a certain experience has such a strong connection, you
   might be able to recreate that for others. Briefly immersing yourself
   allows you to create honestly and potentially strike a chord with
   someone facing a similar situation or emotion. Moments of nostalgia can
   offer clarity, a forgotten perspective, or help us connect with those
   around us.
   Unfortunately, we can drown in nostalgia, dwelling long enough that it
   begins to interfere with the present. Nostalgia can come without
   warning and with a full head of steam, but it cannot be allowed to
   consume us for extended periods of time. The present must always be
   valued more than the past. The past is an important teacher and should
   never be completely forgotten, but lasting happiness is found in the
   moment. It’s in the things we’ve done today and the finer details all
   around us: the colors, emotions, scents, and sounds. The power that
   nostalgia carries should help inform our present decisions and
   observations.
   Nostalgia should be embraced like an old friend who stops by on
   occasion but never sticks around too long. It’s a gift that offers a
   window back to our younger self, the real emotions we felt, and what
   makes us the person we are today. Be cautious, but appreciate these
   moments. They can be harnessed for good and inspiration.
   Quite simply, nostalgia is a beautiful suffering.

   Tagged: Nostalgia, Nostalgic, Perspective

   Newer PostChasing Adventure: A Forgotten Perspective
   Older PostBook Review: 100 Sideways Miles

ajh.

   Back to Top
