   IFRAME: https://gtm-server.healthline.com/ns.html?id=GTM-MB6365D

     * Conditions
          + Featured
               o Addictions
               o Anxiety Disorder
               o ADHD
               o Bipolar Disorder
               o Depression
               o PTSD
               o Schizophrenia
          + Articles
               o Adjustment Disorder
               o Agoraphobia
               o Antisocial Personality Disorder
               o Borderline Personality Disorder
               o Childhood ADHD
               o Dissociative Identity Disorder
               o Narcissistic Personality Disorder
               o Narcolepsy
               o Oppositional Defiant Disorder
               o Panic Attack
               o Postpartum Depression
               o Schizoaffective Disorder
               o Seasonal Affective Disorder
               o Sex Addiction
               o Social Anxiety
               o Specific Phobias
               o Teenage Depression
               o Trauma
     * Discover
          + Wellness Topics
               o Black Mental Health
               o Grief
               o Emotional Health
               o Sex & Relationships
               o Trauma
               o Understanding Therapy
               o Workplace Mental Health
          + Original Series
               o My Life with OCD
               o Caregivers Chronicles
               o Empathy at Work
               o Sex, Love & All of the Above
               o Parent Central
               o Mindful Moment
          + News & Events
               o Mental Health News
               o COVID-19
               o Live Town Hall: Mental Health in Focus
          + Podcasts
               o Inside Mental Health
               o Inside Schizophrenia
               o Inside Bipolar
     * Quizzes
          + Conditions
               o ADHD Symptoms Quiz
               o Anxiety Symptoms Quiz
               o Autism Quiz: Family & Friends
               o Autism Symptoms Quiz
               o Bipolar Disorder Quiz
               o Borderline Personality Test
               o Childhood ADHD Quiz
               o Depression Symptoms Quiz
               o Eating Disorder Quiz
               o Narcissim Symptoms Test
               o OCD Symptoms Quiz
               o Psychopathy Test
               o PTSD Symptoms Quiz
               o Schizophrenia Quiz
          + Lifestyle
               o Attachment Style Quiz
               o Career Test
               o Do I Need Therapy Quiz?
               o Domestic Violence Screening Quiz
               o Emotional Type Quiz
               o Loneliness Quiz
               o Parenting Style Quiz
               o Personality Test
               o Relationship Quiz
               o Stress Test
               o What's Your Sleep Like?
     * Resources
          + Treatment & Support
               o Find Support
               o Suicide Prevention
               o Drugs & Medications
               o Find a Therapist

   (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON) Conditions
     * (BUTTON) Discover
     * (BUTTON) Quizzes
     * (BUTTON) Resources

   (BUTTON) Subscribe
   (BUTTON)

The Benefits of Nostalgia

   Medically reviewed by Scientific Advisory Board — By John DiPrete on
   September 16, 2018

   If unpleasant or obsessional, past memories can hurt — but nostalgia is
   good for you. The benefits of this internal psychological state are
   touted in various academic studies exploring the art and practice of
   what could be deemed as “pleasant reminiscing.“

   According to experts, personal memories from long ago of family and
   friends can link us together in shared comforts of tradition, and also
   lend a gratifying sense of continuity in our lives.

   Nostalgia can take on many different forms. Watching an old
   black-and-white movie can trigger a cultural nostalgia for a lost
   period in time. Often that longing can predate one’s own date of birth:
   fondness for a time only your parents may have known and talked about.

   The mental journey back through time adds a fourth dimension to the
   present. If mindfulness is the focal point of the Eternal Now,
   nostalgia forms a special continuum to the timeless past, expanding our
   concept of the self. The future may be vague, inchoate and
   unpredictable; but the past represents a finished whole that cannot be
   harmed or tampered with.

   Documented reasons why nostalgia (when used intelligently) can be good
   for us:

   It allows us to cast off the stresses of modern life by traveling back
   to a period of our own choosing. It’s like escaping into the confines
   of a good book or a darkened theater, but in this case the story is
   real and (if chosen wisely) has been assured a happy ending.

   Especially for the elderly, frequently isolated from loved ones and
   familiar surroundings, recapturing the past often results in
   maintaining a positive outlook and leads to purposeful activities, such
   as telling stories and sharing wisdom from a bygone time.

   According to Dena Kemmet, “an additional function of nostalgia may be
   its motivating potential. Nostalgia may boost optimism, spark
   inspiration, and foster creativity.”

   According to Dr. Clay Routledge, Social Psychologist and Associate
   Professor of Psychology at North Dakota State University,nostalgia
   “increases positive mood, self-esteem, feelings of social
   connectedness, optimism about the future, and perceptions of meaning in
   life. Furthermore, nostalgia motivates people to focus on cultivating
   meaningful relationships and pursue important life goals. In addition,
   as people get older, nostalgia makes them feel youthful and energetic.
   Nostalgia also reduces existential fears about death.”

   The emotion of nostalgia can be evoked from a familiar scent, an old
   photograph, or a cherished song. Often it occurs during periods of
   sadness or transition, but it can appear anytime — affecting the young
   as well as old. Even children as young as eight-years-old can
   experience the wistfulness of times past.

   How nostalgic are you? The research of Krystine Batcho has led New
   Scientist to create a quiz on the subject, to determine one‘s degree of
   wistful thinking. A high score indicates a person more attuned to life
   and more adaptable to life‘s vicissitudes.

   The healthy use of nostalgia is not about retreating into the past. On
   the contrary, exploring the treasures of our “mental” time capsules can
   propel us toward the future, with a restored sense of enthusiasm and
   hope. The regular practice of this discipline has been found to be
   correlated with increased resilience and self-confidence.

   For some, nostalgia can come to resemble a spiritual meditation.
   Indeed, the past is more venerated in places where the future is more
   fleeting — where constant change is often expected and demanded. The
   “cushion” against future shock rests on the pillow of slow
   self-reflection. Such a spirit of languid repose opposes the current
   epoch, a time when the present is rooted in gross speed and frequent
   turmoil.

   The judicious use of nostalgia offers each one of us who feels stranded
   in the present an anchor to the past.

   Last medically reviewed on September 16, 2018
   FEEDBACK:
   Medically reviewed by Scientific Advisory Board — By John DiPrete on
   September 16, 2018

Read this next

     * How to Move Past Regret
       Regret is a common feeling, but knowing how to move past and
       learning from regrets can help you live a better life.
       READ MORE
     *
     * What Are Common Symptoms of Dyslexia?
       Medically reviewed by Joslyn Jelinek, LCSW
       Dyslexia is a learning disorder that can make reading and writing
       more challenging.
       READ MORE
     * 6 Ways to Live an Authentic Life
       Medically reviewed by Kendra Kubala, PsyD
       Living authentically means you focus on being yourself and not a
       version that others expect. Authentic living can improve your
       mental health and self-
       READ MORE
     * Why Change Is the Only Constant and How to Embrace It
       Medically reviewed by Marney White, PhD, MS
       Change often requires you to come out from a zone of comfort and
       security. If you experience difficulty adapting to change, remember
       that you're not…
       READ MORE
     * What Is the Grey Rock Method and Is It Effective?
       The grey rock method is where you act unresponsive to protect
       yourself from abuse. We look at how to do this safely.
       READ MORE
     * Burnout Test: Am I Burned Out?
       Medically reviewed by Danielle Wade, LCSW
       This quiz aims to help you identify the common signs of burnout so
       you can know if you're experiencing stress, burnout, or something
       else.
       READ MORE
     * Can You Recover from Dissociative Identity Disorder?
       Medically reviewed by Kendra Kubala, PsyD
       There is no absolute cure for DID, but therapy and other treatments
       can reduce your symptoms and improve your quality of life.
       READ MORE
     * What Are the Physical Symptoms of Grief?
       Medically reviewed by Debra Rose Wilson, PhD, MSN, RN, IBCLC,
       AHN-BC, CHT
       Grief can cause physical symptoms such as exhaustion and
       inflammation and can lead to conditions such as diabetes and heart
       disease. Learn more about…
       READ MORE
     * 5 Ways to Practice Gratitude When You Don't Feel Grateful
       Expressing gratitude when you're experiencing challenging
       situations can be difficult. But practicing gratitude can
       strengthen relationships and your…
       READ MORE
     * What Is Emotional Dysregulation?
       Medically reviewed by Joslyn Jelinek, LCSW
       Finding it hard to control your emotions? Emotional dysregulation
       has many causes, including past trauma and mental health
       conditions.
       READ MORE

     * About Us
     * Contact Us
     * Terms of Use
     * Privacy policy
     * Privacy Settings
     * Advertising Policy

     * Medical Affairs
     * Content Integrity
     * Newsletter
     * Find a Therapist
     * © 2005-2022 Psych Central a Red Ventures Company. All rights
       reserved. Our website services, content, and products are for
       informational purposes only. Psych Central does not provide medical
       advice, diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information.

   © 2005-2022 Psych Central a Red Ventures Company. All rights reserved.
   Our website services, content, and products are for informational
   purposes only. Psych Central does not provide medical advice,
   diagnosis, or treatment. See additional information.
   AboutCareersAdvertise with us

   OUR BRANDS
   HealthlineMedical News TodayGreatistPsych Central
