   If you are seeing this message, that means JavaScript has been disabled
   on your browser, please enable JS to make this app work.

   IFRAME: //www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-5RD8FD

   IFRAME: //www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-PWNBGVS

   (BUTTON) Open Menu
    Home Health Money Travel Food Style
   (BUTTON)
   [789da85838ff6290ea2fc1fb7753e8b6.png]
   #ZoomerDaily
   (BUTTON)
   [1a4e69f97a98d5d2dd16889a78644848.png]
   Policy & Perspective
   (BUTTON)
   [786e4ff3f167e9ade6b0ae4163f0765e.png]
   Arts & Entertainment
   (BUTTON)
   [fe202f7c32b322266e30c2e5e8cd8f47.png]
   Book Club
   (BUTTON)
   [53ae73b92d2caeb0cfc6623a87c26f8c.png]
   Classifieds
   (BUTTON)
   [facf9333bb0d8a0051a586ef5c2c2052.png]
   Stars & Royals
   (BUTTON)
   [2812d8cf342ec0b65f1d23d9b629ff70.png]
   Sex & Love

Subscribe

   NewslettersMagazine

Everything Zoomer

   AboutPrivacy PolicyTerms of ServiceAdvertiseContact Us
   (BUTTON) Close Menu
   (BUTTON) Toggle navigation
     * Home
     * Health
          + Longevity
          + Diet & Nutrition
          + Zoomer Fitness
          + Zoomer Yoga
     * Money
          + Real Estate
          + Personal Finance
          + Work & Retirement
          + Budget
          + Investing
     * Travel
          + Zooming: Travel Hub
          + Zoomer Golf
          + Savvy Tips
          + Destinations
          + Best of Canada
          + Bucket List
     * Food
          + Recipes
          + Libations
          + Celeb Chefs
          + Entertaining
     * Style
          + Fashion
          + Beauty
          + Home & Garden
          + Shopping
     * Book Club
     * Classifieds
     *

     * NewsletterSubscribe

   (BUTTON)
   Everything Zoomer
     * Home
     * Health
          + Longevity
          + Diet & Nutrition
          + Zoomer Fitness
          + Zoomer Yoga
     * Money
          + Real Estate
          + Personal Finance
          + Work & Retirement
          + Budget
          + Investing
     * Travel
          + Zooming: Travel Hub
          + Zoomer Golf
          + Savvy Tips
          + Destinations
          + Best of Canada
          + Bucket List
     * Food
          + Recipes
          + Libations
          + Celeb Chefs
          + Entertaining
     * Style
          + Fashion
          + Beauty
          + Home & Garden
          + Shopping
     * Book Club
     * Classifieds
     *

     * NEWSLETTERSubscribe

Way Back When? The ’90s Nostalgia Boom and Why We All Long for a Simpler Time

   Mike Crisolago | December 5th, 2019
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   90s nostalgia

   Photo: Mark Piovesan via iStock / Getty Images Plus

   The word “nostalgia” evokes images of everything from classic cars to
   Woodstock to bellbottoms, all the way back to the golden age of
   Hollywood. Think James Dean in Rebel Without a Cause, not James Van Der
   Beek in Dawson’s Creek. But the ’90s began 30 years ago, meaning that
   nostalgia for that decade today is akin to nostalgia for the 1970s in
   the year 2000. And no one made a fuss about that.

   Yes, the 1990s are officially nostalgic because, just as Paul Simon
   sang, “Every generation throws a hero up the pop charts,” every
   generation also tints their pop culture with rosy reminiscences. Now,
   it’s the millennial generation’s turn.

   The ’90s nostalgia kick began in the early 2010s but gained serious
   traction in recent years, fuelled by total pop culture recall like the
   resurgence of the hit sitcom Friends — thanks to Netflix — including
   50-year-old Jennifer Aniston, who crashed Instagram in October when she
   joined the social media platform with a photo of her and
   the Friends cast, setting a world record by amassing one million
   followers in just over five hours. She currently stands at 21 million
   followers and counting.
   90s nostalgia Jennifer Aniston’s first Instagram post, a current photo
   of the cast of “Friends.” Clockwise from front: Jennifer Aniston, Lisa
   Kudrow, Courteney Cox, Matt LeBlanc, David Schwimmer and Matthew Perry.
   Photo: Jennifer Aniston/Instagram


   Of course, millennials make up close to 65 per cent of Instagram’s user
   base, which explains why ‘90s nostalgia accounts flourish, offering
   users a regular fix of the decade’s cultural headliners, from the
   Britney Spears/Justin Timberlake romance to Kirk Cobain candids to
   Dennis Rodman’s outlandish hairstyles and, of course, photos of the
   Friends cast.

   Meanwhile, hit ’90s shows like Full House, Boy Meets World and Beverly
   Hills 90210 landed reboots as bands like Backstreet Boys, the Spice
   Girls, Smashing Pumpkins and Hootie and the Blowfish returned to
   touring. Even Canuck rocker Alanis Morissette, 45, announced she’ll hit
   the road in 2020 to mark the 25th anniversary of Jagged Little Pill,
   her seminal 1995 album, alongside fellow ’90s mainstays Liz Phair and
   the band Garbage. McDonald’s, meanwhile, brought back ’90s-era Happy
   Meal toys, lip gloss sales surged  and ‘90s themed board games are hot
   holiday gift items in 2019.

The 1990s as Nostalgia? As If!

   Rapper Vanilla Ice, 52, who dropped his hit album To the Extreme in
   1990, told Rolling Stone last year that he considers the 1990s the
   “last truly great decade,” adding, “How would you look back at 2000 to
   2017 and remember anything? How would you see somebody wearing some
   gear and say, ‘Hey, that’s gotta be from 2014?’ There’s no music there,
   there’s no pop culture, there’s no fashion that defines the
   generation.”

   In a similar vein, Bustle’s Sophie Atkinson says, “We’re emotionally
   invested in the entertainment from [the ’90s] because back then, with
   limited access to every album/TV show/film ever, the ones you did own
   meant absolutely everything to us.”

   In 1998, when she was 13, Toronto-based journalist and editor Randi
   Bergman filled a time capsule with personal items of the era —
   everything from Spice Girls stickers to Titanic movie ticket stubs to
   candy wrappers and photos of celebrity crushes. She opened the capsule
   in 2017 and created a viral hit when she shared the contents on
   Instagram, following it up with a podcast about nostalgia and now
   a website, Capsule 98.  It’s dedicated to “the formative objects,
   places and experiences that shape who we are,” regardless of generation
   or decade.
   90s nostalgia A mixtape of popular songs from 1998 that Randi Bergman
   included in her time capsule. It includes “As Long As You Love Me” by
   her favourite group at the time, Backstreet Boys. Photo: Randi
   Bergman/Instagram


   The 34-year-old suggests one reason for the boom in ’90s nostalgia is
   that millennials fully indulge it online in a way that previous
   generations, who didn’t have the internet when they were in their 20s
   and 30s, never could.

   “Another reason that I know is because of the direness of how
   everybody’s thinking of the world right now and the fact that things
   are very down,” she says in an interview. “Maybe people are nostalgic
   for an easier, simpler time, pre-social media. That could be part of it
   too.”

I Want It That Way

   Bergman may be on to something. In 2013, University of Surrey
   psychologist Erica Hepper told the New York Times that feelings of
   nostalgia actually peak in young adults and again in old age while
   slumping somewhat in the years in between.  “Nostalgia helps us deal
   with transitions,” Hepper said. “The young adults are just moving away
   from home and or starting their first jobs, so they fall back on
   memories of family Christmases, pets and friends in school.”

   For millennials, like other generations, nostalgia serves as a safety
   blanket, a source of comfort and a means of temporary escape from the
   demands of adulthood. The word “nostalgia” itself is a combination of
   two Greek words that mean “homecoming” and “pain.” Or, in other words,
   homesick.

   But Bergman adds that nostalgia also serves another purpose, serving as
   a kind of online shorthand.

   “For example, take a meme — put a picture of some classic ’90s thing
   and put some new frame of reference on it, and it instantly makes
   sense. Whereas someone like my sister [who is 10 years older] … it
   doesn’t immediately resonate to her the same way.”

   Another Canadian millennial, Lee Davis, 24, takes the idea of nostalgia
   as communication to the next level with HideSeek, a pop-up he
   co-founded that currently resides in Montreal and courts millennials
   “wanting highly interactive experiences that are also very shareable
   and Instagramable.”

   HideSeek is unique in the nostalgia business in that it isn’t pegged to
   specific pop-culture references. Guests tour rooms outfitted with
   elements relatable to all generations: rooms themed around items like
   crayons, boxes of classic kids’ cereals, a Slinky salon, a shopping
   cart to push your pals around in and even a ball pit. In addition, some
   rooms contain oversized items, their massive scale creating a childlike
   sensation for visitors.
   90s nostalgia Visitors enjoy the Salon Slinky at HideSeek. Photo:
   HideSeek/Instagram


   “That’s what we really focused on — less about specific nostalgic
   memories and more to create an experience that lets you feel like a
   kid,” Davis says. His idea of nostalgia is centred on the notion of
   “play,” evoking memories of recess or after school sports.

   “Nostalgia’s just so powerful,” he adds. “And I can just see it from
   the customers’ reactions. When they see something that reminds them of
   their past or it makes them feel like kids, they get this warm, gushy
   feeling.”

   Davis says people of all ages, including grandparents with their
   grandkids, enjoy HideSeek, including “two grandmas [who came] in, and
   they took a photo in the shopping cart and in the ball pit, and it went
   pretty viral.” But his customer base remains millennials, many of whom
   come in search of an escape from the daily grind. “They say, ‘Oh my
   god, I get to go to a one-hour experience that’s going to let me feel
   like a kid again? I get to step outside from my normal day-to-day
   routine?’”
   90s nostalgia It’s not just millennials who enjoy the ball pit at
   HideSeek. Photo: HideSeek/Instagram

Beyond ’90s Nostalgia

   At the same time, millennial nostalgia extends beyond the 1990s to
   feeling  fondness for a time they didn’t even experience.

   In fact, a 2013 study out of Cornell University showed that “music
   transmitted from generation to generation shapes autobiographical
   memories, preferences, and emotional responses, a phenomenon we call
   ‘cascading reminiscence bumps.’” The study used specific examples of
   millennials in their 20s listening to the music their parents enjoyed
   at the same age.

   Elaine Wren regularly witnesses a similar nostalgic phenomenon in
   action. The 52-year-old Toronto native works as the show manager for
   Steve Michaels, an Elvis Presley tribute performer, and has worked with
   Beatles tribute performers as well. She regularly sees three
   generations of family members attend the concerts, adding, “If the
   grandparent or parents were invested in that time period and that
   music, it seems to have been passed on generation to generation. That’s
   the only way they can experience what their older relatives experienced
   … They see it through their eyes.”
   90s nostalgia Elvis Presley tribute performer Steve Michaels as the
   King of Rock ‘n’ Roll. Photo: Steve Michaels as ELVIS/Facebook


   For Wren, “Nostalgia kicks in when you’re trying to keep a feeling
   alive, keep a memory alive. I think nostalgia’s more of a feeling. It’s
   sometimes not even [attached to] a time frame.” And like nostalgic
   millennials, Wren says that many of the older audience members she
   speaks to “miss the simplicity of ‘back then,’ and these shows take
   them back to that world that they miss.”

How Looking Back Allows Us to Move Forward

   In reality, both baby boomers and millennials yearn for a simpler time.
   The only difference is the decade for which they long. Generational
   preferences aside, though, it turns out that nostalgia is actually good
   for you.

   Clay Routledge, a psychology professor and author of Nostalgia: A
   Psychological Resource, told New Orleans Public Radio in 2017 that
   while people turn to nostalgia in times of stress,  it actually makes
   them more optimistic about the future. He adds that studies “show this
   both in terms of people reporting that they’re more optimistic about
   the future, more inspired but also behaviourally, too, in terms of
   people actually going out and wanting to interact with and meet people
   after they’ve engaged in nostalgia.”

   So ultimately, while decades and generations move on, the human impulse
   to revisit our past for a nostalgic boost remains constant. And that’s
   a good thing, regardless of what you actually consider nostalgia.

   “I feel like everybody connects to nostalgia in a different way,
   whether you’re 90 or you’re 10,” Bergman says. “I think about it all
   the time — what are the things now that we take for granted or that are
   so commonplace? And we’re just going to one day be like, ‘Oh, I miss
   Netflix binging.’ Who knows? That could be nostalgic.”

   RELATED:

   Nostalgia: A Tale of Christmas Past at Eaton’s Toyland

   Nostalgia: A Wartime Recipe for Woolton Pie

   Nostalgia: A Throwback to When Papers Were Delivered by Erstwhile,
   Ink-Stained Kids

   Nostalgia: 50 Years Later, A Look Back At Woodstock
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)

   EXPLORE  HealthMoneyTravelFoodStyleBook
   ClubClassifieds#ZoomerDailyPolicy & Perspective
   Arts & EntertainmentStars & RoyaltySex & Love

   CONNECT  FacebookTwitterInstagram

   SUBSCRIBE  Terms of Subscription ServiceE-NewslettersSubscribe to
   Zoomer Magazine

   BROWSE  AboutMastheadContact UsAdvertise with UsPrivacy Policy

   EverythingZoomer.com is part of the ZoomerMedia Digital Network
