    #Manipal The Talk Network » Feed Manipal The Talk Network » Comments
   Feed Manipal The Talk Network » The Neurology of Nostalgia—Why Do We
   Long for the Past? Comments Feed alternate alternate

   Skip to content

   Search

   Search for: ____________________ Search

   Manipal The Talk Network

   Manipal’s largest student media organisation, run by a bunch of
   passionate folks across town. #WeAreManipal

   (BUTTON) Menu
     * Who we are
          + Executive Board – MIT
          + Executive Board – HS
          + Managing Board – MIT
          + Managing Board – HS
     * Manipal
          + Fests
          + Events
          + Clubs
          + In and Around Manipal
          + Senior’s Guide
          + Fresher’s Guide
          + The Manipal Directory
          + Videos
     * Creative
          + Stories
          + Poetry
          + Creative extras
     * Articles
          + Current Affairs
               o Cognizant Citizen
               o Other
          + Informative
               o General
               o Interviews
          + Rights
               o LGBT+
               o Women’s Rights
          + Miscellaneous
     * Contact Us
     * Fresher’s Guide

   Open Search

The Neurology of Nostalgia—Why Do We Long for the Past?


   You close your eyes. Suddenly, you’re in 6th grade again — it’s the
   first week of school. You’re walking through the corridors of your
   school, eating mom’s hand-made food that magically tastes yummy even
   when it’s cold, and watching your classmates playing hopscotch. You
   remember how you would wait for time to fly by so you could run home,
   only to go back to playing with your friends on the streets outside.
   When it was dinner time, you’d hear mom calling for you to go back
   home. At almost bedtime, you’d suddenly remember you had to wrap your
   notebooks in brown-paper cover. You’d plead mom to help you do it. And
   then off you went, to bed, feeling excited for the next fun day at
   school.


   Nostalgia is defined as “a feeling of pleasure and also slight sadness
   when you think about things that happened in the past”, by the
   Cambridge Dictionary. The term nostalgia encompasses that bittersweet
   feeling of recollecting fond memories of the past. From flipping
   through photo albums to scrolling through your photo gallery, from
   rereading the Harry Potter series to Enid Blyton books, or listening to
   a song from the 2000s that manages to take you back in time — we have
   countless ways of reminiscing. The mere lingering thought of the good
   ol’ days can easily feel like a warm, fuzzy hug pulling you closer the
   more you think about it.


   Derived from the Greek words “nostos” (meaning homecoming) and “algos”
   (meaning pain/ache), nostalgia used to have negative associations
   historically and was often thought of as a disease. However, the
   meaning of the word has metamorphosed over the years. Present-day
   research portrays an entirely different story that has unraveled behind
   the scenes, through experiments and studies. These studies have found
   that nostalgia can enrich resilience and happiness amongst humans.
   Further, the more nostalgia that is experienced, the more optimistic a
   person is likely to become.


Nostalgia in Neurology: Your brain rewards you and is proud of you!

   Experiencing nostalgia cannot be limited by viewing it as solely a
   feeling. Although nostalgia is defined appropriately, it is often used
   loosely — ignoring the implications it has on the human mind and brain
   function.

   Have you ever felt like listening to a song takes you back to some
   visual and cosy memory that makes you smile? Or perhaps a whiff of some
   flower that takes you back to your grandmother’s garden? Some factors
   like smell, music or scenery can trigger nostalgia in us. The trigger
   of nostalgia is usually an environmental factor such as a conversation
   with a childhood friend, or a certain significant date. However, it may
   also involve instinctive remembrance of the past.

   Every time nostalgia is experienced, a part of the brain is activated.
   The performance and activity of the brain’s reward systems and memory
   system are altered through stimulation. This includes the hippocampus —
   responsible for long-term memory and factual details of episodic
   memories, as well as the brain’s reward system, consisting of the
   substantia nigra, the ventral tegmental area, and ventral striatum.


   When the reward systems in the brain are triggered, a chemical known as
   Dopamine is released. Researchers have led experiments using Magnetic
   Resonance Imaging (MRI) scans to reveal that when nostalgia is felt,
   there is a close link between the release of dopamine and memories in
   the hippocampus. The dopamine deposits itself directly in the
   hippocampus, thereby activating the dopamine system in the hippocampus.
   This results in a significant improvement in the ability to remember
   specific memories and details. This justifies how when humans reward
   themselves at a particular time, they are able to remember that
   specific memory and information reasonably better. For example, if you
   scored an A+ on an exam and took your friends out as a treat, you’re
   more likely to remember the memory even years later, versus if there
   was no tangible reward involved.


   In this sense, nostalgia itself can be considered to be a type of
   reward since it allows us to relive memories of the past. This also
   explains how when you think about specific memories or details
   frequently over time, your ability to recall it is drastically
   enhanced.


   Thus, in our constant stride towards the future, recalling and reliving
   happy memories from the past and creating the feeling of nostalgia, as
   a result, can lead to boosted levels of happiness, and reduced stress
   levels.


Nostalgia Marketing: Your Fond Memories of the Past—Offer Valid Till Stocks
Last!

   Over the years, the powerhouses of the world — politicians, marketers
   and large organizations — have taken to nostalgia as a trick under
   their sleeves. Since nostalgia brings back strong emotion, it is easily
   used as an appeal, ploying the common person to create connections.


   “Doodh si safedi, Nirma se aayi, Rangeen kapda bhi khil khil jaaye.”
   Sound familiar?


   Washing Powder Nirma, Parle-G biscuits, Frooti — these are just some of
   several Indian brands that established themselves years ago and took to
   nostalgia marketing decades later. The reason they are able to do
   brilliantly in the market even today is because their brand recall
   value is immensely powerful. Their products are purchased and
   advertisements watched because viewers are able to feel an emotional
   connect and nostalgia of their childhood days.


   An often-used proverb, old is gold, is particularly relevant here.
   Nostalgia marketing taps into emotions and connectedness, taking people
   for a trip down memory lane. A marketers’ target audience is likely to
   remain loyal if they can connect to the brand. Nostalgia marketing
   allows brands to acknowledge the present without letting go of the
   past. Consumers today are able to re-experience the past through
   advertisements, jingles and campaigns. This results in a strong
   instinct to hold on tight to memories of the past as the uncertainties
   of the future grow more complex.


   People are also particularly nostalgic around festivals and occasions.
   Brands are able to capitalise on this through the release of
   advertisements that strike the right chord, picking up on what stings
   the most. For example, Cadbury chocolates’ emotional advertisements
   during the Indian festive season every year. As viewers feel connected
   to the advertisement, it translates into a connection with the brand.

Cultural Implications of Nostalgia


     Nostalgia is like a grammar lesson: you find the present tense, but
     the past perfect!

     – Owens Lee Pomeroy


   A Professor of Sociology and Personality Psychology,  Constantine
   Sedikides, describes Nostalgia as the “perfect internal politician,
   connecting the past with the present, pointing optimistically to the
   future.” Nostalgia has the power to bring a group of people closer and
   allows a person to establish a better connection with themselves.


   Through the knowledge of its impact and a deeper dive into how
   nostalgia works — the benefit of nostalgia can be applied to personal
   lives. Nostalgia can be a harbinger of a sense of calm and joy.
   However, treading carefully on this front is a must, because it doesn’t
   take much for nostalgia to become a cycle of negativity. “Those were
   simpler times, can’t we just go back to those days?” are especially
   common thoughts when recalling childhood memories. Instead of trying to
   turn back in time, researchers recommend that the focus must remain on
   today’s position while recognizing how you were able to bridge the gap
   between where you are today and where you were years ago. This can also
   be a signal of growth and positive change. It is also important to
   acknowledge how the moments that cause nostalgia today have augmented
   life over the years.

Childhood and the Nostalgic effect on Decisions

   As said before, nostalgia arises from memories, and typically it starts
   when we become young adults. So usually nostalgia is shaped a lot by
   childhood memories— a time when there were almost no responsibilities
   and when our thoughts and vision of the world were a lot simpler. It
   often revolves around idolising this era, and therefore there’s an
   unconscious attempt to recreate the instances similar to those
   seemingly perfect memories. We try reaching for things or people that
   symbolise the past. For example, a person might fondly remember a
   family recipe from their childhood. It becomes associated with
   happiness and cosiness, and hence they slowly grow attached to that
   specific dish. It can translate to more significant life decisions as
   well, where our preferences of surroundings and people are based on our
   past. If a person had an experience of living in a spacious home with
   gardens, shifting to an apartment may seem unpreferable compared to a
   separate home.

Culture and religion

   Each person is born into different cultures and religions and how their
   parents followed their culture directly affects the person. We have a
   nostalgic urge to follow what our parents did, or rather what we were
   most exposed to in our years of growth. Strong religious beliefs,
   superstitions, colourism or racism are some examples of cultural and
   social elements we are exposed to as a child. Even when we realise what
   is right or wrong and consciously abstain from wrong thoughts,
   somewhere deep inside there exist subtle biases. This is probably why
   many people feel uncomfortable and shocked by certain things people in
   other countries might do. While for the other people it might be
   natural, for this person brought up in another culture, whose nostalgic
   urge is trying to find elements from his own culture, it would seem
   very different. It can become so strongly embedded in their thoughts
   that even when many people might criticize them on their beliefs, they
   would refuse to think otherwise.

Nostalgia and Dreams

   Dreams and memories have a rather interesting connection. It has been
   found that during our sleep, our brain processes our memories, while
   simultaneously dreaming. This happens most often in the REM stage of
   sleep, where the person has the tendency to have vivid dreams. Our most
   significant and emotional memories affect the nature of our dreams.
   Hence a dream can actually create contact between us and people we
   haven’t met for a long time. It can show us places from far away
   memories and thus trigger nostalgia in us. It can let us interact with
   our past memories or fond experiences and be a great source of comfort
   to us. Sometimes we might even feel very strong emotions and the dream
   may seem so real that they are more impactful than real-life emotions.

Nostalgia as Therapy

   Nostalgia may be a bittersweet state of mind, but when looked at
   deeply, its positive aspects outweigh the negative. After all, it’s a
   filtered recollection of our memories. It is there to trigger
   positivity in people. It can make lonely people feel less so and give
   them hopes about their future. It cuts through boredom and gives us
   something to take comfort in. Our past memories, though altered, make
   us feel more human and closer to people around us. It can rekindle
   relationships and strengthen bonds in newly formed ones. When we feel
   hopeless, nostalgia can remind us that there’s scope for making good
   memories in future and helps us to push through the tough times.

   For people who feel detached from their past selves, nostalgia is a
   great tool to create a sense of self-continuity and remind them of the
   factors that haven’t changed in our personalities. Many people might
   feel that their lives have been for nought, that there were no
   contributions from their side. Nostalgia can make them realise the
   value of human interactions and every other beautiful memory they
   created in the past.

   So take all the time to recount your funniest memories with your
   childhood friends, or journal your favourite memories. Walk yourself
   through scenarios from the past — you playing in your childhood home,
   visiting your high school, going back to your favourite vacation spot.
   Decorate your room with framed photos and polaroids, throw birthday
   parties like you’re turning 6 again. Play music (the Ketchup song) on
   repeat and groove with the beats. The present moment can become a haven
   of happiness when it’s woven with the fondest memories from the past.

   Written by Anushka Bhattacharyya and Sanam Lulla for MTTN

   Edited by Avaneesh Jai Damaraju for MTTN

   Featured Image Courtesy: Wikimedia Commons

Published by MTTN CREW

   View all posts by MTTN CREW
   October 6, 2020

   General, Informative

   dreams, neurology, Nostalgia

Post navigation

   The Mumbai Mob: Fall of the City of Dreams
   The Hathras Incident — What it says about Indian Society

Leave a Reply Cancel reply

   You must be logged in to post a comment.

   Proudly powered by WordPress | Theme: Baskerville 2 by Anders Noren.

   Up ↑
