   IFRAME: https://gtm-server.healthline.com/ns.html?id=GTM-MB6365D

     * Health Conditions
          + Health Conditions
               o Alzheimer's & Dementia
               o Anxiety
               o Arthritis
               o Asthma & Allergies
               o Breast Cancer
               o Cancer
               o Cardiovascular Health
               o COVID-19
               o Dermatology & Skincare
               o Diabetes
               o Environment & Sustainability
               o Exercise & Fitness
               o Eye Health
               o Headache & Migraine
               o Health Equity
               o HIV & AIDS
               o Human Biology
               o Inflammatory Bowel Disease
               o Leukemia
               o LGBTQIA+
               o Men's Health
               o Mental Health
               o Multiple Sclerosis (MS)
               o Nutrition
               o Parkinson's Disease
               o Psoriasis
               o Sexual Health
               o Women's Health
     * Health Products
          + Health Products
               o Nutrition & Fitness
               o Vitamins & Supplements
               o CBD
               o Sleep
               o Mental Health
               o At-Home Testing
               o Men’s Health
               o Women’s Health
     * Discover
          + News
               o Latest News
          + Original Series
               o Medical Myths
               o Honest Nutrition
               o Through My Eyes
               o New Normal Health
          + Podcasts
               o How Viagra became a new 'tool' for young men
               o What makes breast cancer come back?
               o How to understand chronic pain
               o What is behind vaccine hesitancy?
               o The amazing story of hepatitis C, from discovery to cure
               o New directions in dementia research
     * Tools
          + General Health
               o Drugs A-Z
               o Health Hubs
          + Health Tools
               o BMI Calculators and Charts
               o Blood Pressure Chart: Ranges and Guide
               o Breast Cancer: Self-Examination Guide
               o Sleep Calculator
          + Quizzes
               o RA Myths vs Facts
               o Type 2 Diabetes: Managing Blood Sugar
               o Ankylosing Spondylitis Pain: Fact or Fiction
     * Connect
          + About Medical News Today
               o Who We Are
               o Our Editorial Process
               o Content Integrity
               o Conscious Language
          + Newsletters
               o Sign Up
          + Follow Us

   (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON) Health Conditions
     * (BUTTON) Health Products
     * (BUTTON) Discover
     * (BUTTON) Tools
     * (BUTTON) Connect

   (BUTTON) Subscribe

Products and Reviews

     * Nutrition & Fitness
     * Vitamins & supplements
     * CBD
     * Sleep
     * Mental health
     * At-home testing
     * Men's Health
     * Women's Health

   (BUTTON)

Why do we need nostalgia?

   By Maria Cohut, Ph.D. on January 1, 2021

   Nostalgia and homesickness are part and parcel of the human experience.
   Most of us associate them with feelings of sadness and sometimes loss,
   but do they actually play a positive role in the human psyche? Medical
   News Today investigates.
   Share on Pinterestkool99/Getty Images

   The term “nostalgia” originates from Ancient Greek via New Latin, and
   it is a composite of the root words “nostos,” meaning “home,” and
   “algos,” meaning “pain.”

   Essentially, it refers to the pain of being far away from home. The
   first time “nostalgia” came into use was in 17th-century Switzerland,
   when physician Johannes Hofer identified it as a condition specific to
   Swiss mercenary soldiers.

   Hofer identified nostalgia as a disease of the mind, and he described
   its mechanism as below:

     “Nostalgia […] is sympathic of an afflicted imagination. Hence, from
     the living spirits entirely by its own momentum along uncommon
     routes through the untouched courses of the channels of the brain to
     the body, and by revisiting the oval tubes of the center brain, it
     is originated by arousing especially the uncommon and ever-present
     idea of the recalled native land in the mind.”

   Some of the symptoms that accompanied this “affliction” included
   “persistent thinking of home, bouts of weeping, anxiety, irregular
   heartbeat, anorexia, insomnia, and even smothering sensations.” This is
   according to a paper published in 2006 by Profs Tim Wildschut and
   Constantine Sedikides, from the University of Southampton in the United
   Kingdom, and their colleagues.

   Physician J. J. Scheuchzer, who lived and worked around the same time
   as Hofer, had a similar view of nostalgia. However, he argued that it
   was not a result of an internal imbalance of the mind, but a condition
   influenced by external factors.

   According to him, nostalgia was caused by “a sharp differential in
   atmospheric pressure causing excessive body pressurization, which in
   turn drove blood from the heart to the brain, thereby producing the
   observed affliction of sentiment.”

   Nostalgia and homesickness as ‘disorders’

   For many centuries, doctors persisted in understanding nostalgia as a
   state of ill health that required treatment. However, views around its
   mechanisms and typology, as well as around which demographics it
   affected, kept shifting over the years.

   In a paper from 2008, Profs Wildschut, Sedikides, and their colleagues
   note that, throughout the 17th and 18th centuries, doctors thought
   nostalgia only affected the Swiss, since they mostly observed it in the
   Swiss mercenary soldiers that lent their services to foreign armies.

   Prof. Svetlana Boym writes that, at this time, cures for nostalgia
   included “leeches, warm hypnotic emulsions, opium” and returning home,
   to the Alps.

   In the early 19th century, however, physicians had begun to acknowledge
   it as a widespread condition that they saw as a form of melancholy or
   depression.

   Throughout the 20th century, doctors kept changing their minds about
   the nature of nostalgia, though they mostly associated it with
   homesickness, an unhelpful psychological mechanism experienced by
   students and migrants unable to adapt to a new life away from home.

   In their 2008 article, Profs Wildschut, Sedikides, and their colleagues
   explain:

     “By the beginning of the 20th century, nostalgia was regarded as a
     psychiatric disorder. Symptoms included anxiety, sadness, and
     insomnia. By the mid-20th century, psychodynamic approaches
     considered nostalgia a subconscious desire to return to an earlier
     life stage, and it was labeled as a repressive compulsive disorder.
     Soon thereafter, nostalgia was downgraded to a variant of
     depression, marked by loss and grief, though still equated with
     homesickness.”

   In their 2006 article, they also point out that, for much of the 20th
   century, some psychologists viewed nostalgia as an “immigrant
   psychosis,” a “mentally repressive compulsive disorder,” or “a
   regressive manifestation closely related to the issue of loss, grief,
   incomplete mourning, and, finally, depression.”

   According to Profs Wildschut, Sedikides, and their colleagues, in the
   late 20th century, doctors and researchers started to differentiate
   between nostalgia and homesickness.

   They suggest homesickness became conflated with mental health issues,
   such as separation anxiety, whereas nostalgia began to be associated
   with idealized images of childhood or past happy times.

   What are the benefits of nostalgia?

   So is nostalgia — and even homesickness — a sign that a person is
   unable to adapt to a new life, new surroundings, or the realities of
   adult life? Or does it also play a positive role in the human psyche?

   Physicians no longer treat nostalgia as a disorder, but the phenomenon
   continues to interest researchers.

   Profs Wildschut, Sedikides, and their colleagues sought to learn more
   about this mental state in a series of studies conducted in 2006.

   One study, based on the self-reported experiences of the participants,
   indicated that nostalgia is, by and large, “a positively toned and
   self-relevant emotion that is often associated with the recall of
   experiences involving interactions with important others or of
   momentous life events.”

   Nostalgic memories, the researchers found, often contained a mixture of
   happiness and sadness that ultimately came together to form a
   constructive narrative:

     “Although most narratives contained negative as well as positive
     elements, these elements were often juxtaposed so as to form a
     redemption sequence — a narrative pattern that progresses from a
     negative to a positive or triumphant life scene.”

   A second study confirmed that nostalgia helps form a constructive
   narrative of meaningful events from the past, but it also identified
   some of the most common triggers of nostalgia.

   According to the researchers, most participants experienced nostalgia
   when faced with difficult life situations, such as present worries and
   anxieties. This suggested that casting their minds back to a happier or
   more meaningful time helped participants cope with present
   uncertainties.

   “Chief among the perceived benefits of nostalgia were its capacity to
   generate positive affect, bolster social bonds, and increase positive
   self-regard,” Profs Wildschut, Sedikides, and their colleagues write.

   Further research reveals other ways that nostalgia can be beneficial.
   For example, a 2012 paper reports that this mental state can help
   increase a person’s willingness to help others, thanks to the fact that
   it strengthens the sense of social connectedness.

   According to Dr. Krystine Batcho — professor of psychology at LeMoyne
   College in Syracuse, NY — nostalgia also helps strengthen a person’s
   identity, their sense of self.

   In an interview for the American Psychological Association, she asserts
   that “nostalgia is an emotional experience that unifies,” that “helps
   unite our sense of who we are, our self, our identity over time,” and
   “gives us a sense of who we want to be […] in the future.”

   Most recently, in June 2020, Dr. Andrew Abeyta — from The State
   University of New Jersey in Camden — and his colleagues show that
   indulging in nostalgic thinking can help reduce the negative
   psychological impact of loneliness.

   “Based on the current research, stopping the cycle of loneliness may
   involve looking to the past for confidence and encouragement,” the
   researchers conclude.

   So when our minds fall back on cherished memories of the past, it may
   be best to allow ourselves this bittersweet experience.
     * Depression
     * Mental Health
     * Psychology / Psychiatry

   Share this article
   By Maria Cohut, Ph.D. on January 1, 2021

Latest news

     * Artificial sweetener aspartame linked to anxiety, mice study finds
     * Alzheimer's: Brain protein offers clues about higher risk in older
       women
     * Talquetamab: New drug may offer hope for those with hard-to-treat
       blood cancer
     * Researchers identify insulin-mimicking molecule that could treat
       diabetes
     * 'Sticky' cholesterol and hypertension may increase heart attack,
       stroke risk

Related Coverage

     * Can scientists 'hack' memory?
       Is it possible to manipulate memory formation and consolidation?
       And why would we want to do it? We explore these questions in this
       Spotlight feature.
       READ MORE
     *
     * Synesthesia: Hearing colors and tasting sounds
       People with synesthesia experience unique perceptual cross-overs,
       such as associating letters or sounds to colors. Learn more about
       it in this…
       READ MORE
     * How language shapes our brains...and our lives
       In this Spotlight, we look at the origins of spoken language, where
       language is present in the brain, and how the languages we speak
       shape our world.
       READ MORE
     * How can we overcome loneliness?
       Loneliness is an epidemic and a major risk factor for premature
       death, recent research suggests. So what can we do to prevent and
       overcome it?
       READ MORE
     * Can pessimism be beneficial?
       Is your glass always half empty? Do you expect negative outcomes?
       As a pessimist, you may have more advantages than you think. Read
       on to learn more.
       READ MORE

     * About Us
     * Contact Us
     * Terms of Use
     * Privacy Policy
     * Privacy Settings
     * Advertising Policy

     * Health Topics
     * Health Hubs
     * Medical Affairs
     * Content Integrity
     * Newsletters
     * © 2004-2022 Healthline Media UK Ltd, Brighton, UK, a Red Ventures
       Company. All rights reserved. MNT is the registered trade mark of
       Healthline Media. Any medical information published on this website
       is not intended as a substitute for informed medical advice and you
       should not take any action before consulting with a healthcare
       professional. See additional information.

   © 2004-2022 Healthline Media UK Ltd, Brighton, UK, a Red Ventures
   Company. All rights reserved. MNT is the registered trade mark of
   Healthline Media. Any medical information published on this website is
   not intended as a substitute for informed medical advice and you should
   not take any action before consulting with a healthcare professional.
   See additional information.
   AboutCareersAdvertise with us

   OUR BRANDS
   HealthlineMedical News TodayGreatistPsych Central
