   #alternate

   [p?c1=2&c2=22434406&cv=2.0&cj=1]

   Open side menu button
   Skip to content
     * News
     * Health
     * Smarter Living
     * Entertainment
     * Relationships
     * Travel
     * Style

     * Coronavirus

   Get the newsletter
   Search bar input (BUTTON) Search button
   __________________________________ ⤫

   Home / Entertainment / 50 Things Only People Who Lived in the 1990s
   Will Remember
   Entertainment

50 Things Only People Who Lived in the 1990s Will Remember

   The '90s may be gone, but the decade is anything but forgotten.
   By Sarah Crow
   May 15, 2019
   By Sarah Crow
   May 15, 2019
     *
     *
     *
     *

   i will always love you, whitney houston, the bodyguard, things only 90s
   kids remember RCA Records via YouTube

   Anyone who lived through the 1990s shares a fond nostalgia for all
   things associated with the era of frosted tips and Y2K panic. You can
   still practically taste your favorite Lip Smackers flavor, you remember
   the thrill of trying to get your call answered on Total Request Live,
   and you still wonder if you could have actually made millions on those
   old Beanie Babies you eventually donated to Goodwill. If you long for
   the days of hair mascara, Furbys, and dial-up internet, then read on
   for the things everyone who survived the '90s remembers.

   1
   The Pain of Seeing Your Tamagotchi Die
   tamagotchi digital pets, things only 90s kids remember tamagotchi
   digital pets, things only 90s kids remember Shutterstock

   The digital pets, which first hit shelves in Japan in 1996, quickly
   became a global phenomenon following their worldwide release the
   following year. Kids whose parents got them one of these needy little
   keychain creatures may have been delighted at first. But who doesn't
   remember the crushing feeling of finding out that their digital pet had
   died because they didn't find time to feed it between math class and
   gym?

   2
   Singing Along to the AOL Dial-Up Noise
   AOL log in screen, things only 90s kids remember AOL log in screen,
   things only 90s kids remember Shutterstock

   While having the world at your fingertips in just seconds today is
   pretty cool, there was something a little bit fun about the
   anticipation that came with logging into AOL and singing along to its
   chorus of screeches as you waited for the homepage to pop up. Unless
   your mom picked up the phone, of course.

   3
   Drinking Hi-C Ecto Cooler
   hi-c ecto cooler, things only 90s kids remember hi-c ecto cooler,
   things only 90s kids remember Amazon

   Your parents may not have let you drink soda, but you were pretty good
   at convincing them that Hi-C's toxic-slime colored Ecto Cooler was
   practically a health food. It was fruit-flavored, after all! And even
   if you missed out in the '90s, the recent Ghostbusters reboot means
   there's still plenty of the stuff available on Amazon.

   4
   Wondering if Ross and Rachel Would Ever Get Back Together
   david schwimmer, jennifer aniston, friends, things only 90s kids
   remember david schwimmer, jennifer aniston, friends, things only 90s
   kids remember IMDB/Warner Bros. Pictures

   Your own relationships may have had their ups and downs, but they were
   nothing compared to the constant will-they-won't-they dynamic between
   Ross and Rachel on Friends. Yes, we know they were on a break, but how
   long would it last?!

   5
   Trying to Determine Which Spice Girl You Were Most Like
   spice girls, things only 90s kids remember spice girls, things only 90s
   kids remember Shutterstock/Featureflash Photo Agency

   Before people were dividing themselves into Carries, Mirandas,
   Charlottes, and Samanthas, they were trying to figure out which Spice
   Girl's style and personality were most like their own. Of course, this
   led to countless fights over group Halloween costumes, but those
   hilarious pictures of you and your friends in sky-high platforms and
   Union Jack mini-dresses were well worth the drama.

   6
   Getting Excited to Show Off Your Trapper Keeper at School
   trapper keeper binder, things only 90s kids remember trapper keeper
   binder, things only 90s kids remember Amazon

   Getting new back to school clothing was cool, but getting a new Trapper
   Keeper (like this one available on Amazon) made you feel like you were
   going to rule the school in the coming year. From the interior pencil
   pocket to the satisfying crunch of the Velcro on its exterior flap,
   having one of these stylish binders made you almost look forward to
   hitting the books again. Almost.

   7
   The Joy of Getting the Last Copy of a Movie at Blockbuster
   blockbuster video store, things only 90s kids remember blockbuster
   video store, things only 90s kids remember Shutterstock

   Whether you were eager to scare yourself silly with a copy of The Sixth
   Sense or crack up with yet another screening of Groundhog Day, there
   was an unrivaled feeling of joy when you went to Blockbuster and found
   that not only was the movie you wanted in stock, but you got the last
   one.

   8
   Watching OJ Simpson's Low-Speed Car Chase and Subsequent Trial Play Out
   on TV
   oj simpson ford bronco, things only 90s kids remember oj simpson ford
   bronco, things only 90s kids remember ZUMA Press, Inc./Alamy Stock
   Photo

   Prior to 1994, a Ford Bronco was just a car. After OJ Simpson and his
   friend, former NFL player Al Cowlings, led the cops on a low-speed car
   chase through Los Angeles following the murders of his ex-wife Nicole
   Brown Simpson and her friend Ron Goldman, the car became inextricably
   linked to the racial tension, fear, and curiosity that gripped both his
   supporters and those who thought him guilty during the subsequent
   murder trial.

   9
   Talking on a Cell Phone the Size of a Brick
   90s motorola cell phone, things only 90s kids remember 90s motorola
   cell phone, things only 90s kids remember Shutterstock/Ben Slater

   While your average smartphone today may fit inside the pocket of your
   jeans, in the '90s, having a cell phone at all was pretty novel. And
   while early Motorola iterations weighed up to two pounds and were
   roughly the size of a standard brick, that didn't stop tech enthusiasts
   at the time from embracing them wholeheartedly.

   10
   Wearing a Plastic Raincoat to Stay Dry
   tommy hilfiger clear rain coat, things only 90s kids remember tommy
   hilfiger clear rain coat, things only 90s kids remember Macy's

   In the '90s, there was no need to decide between showing off your cute
   outfit and staying dry on a rainy day. Thanks to the proliferation of
   see-through raincoats on the market—frequently purchased at stores like
   Wet Seal and Contempo Casuals—you could give anyone eager to know what
   you were wearing a sneak peek. (And fortunately for those who missed
   out, designers like Tommy Hilfiger are capitalizing on our '90s
   nostalgia and still selling them at stores like Macy's today.)

   11
   Coveting Your Friends' Super Nintendo Systems
   super nintendo system, things only 90s kids remember super nintendo
   system, things only 90s kids remember Shutterstock/Robtek

   Released in the United States in 1991, the Super Nintendo quickly
   became the most popular gaming system since the Atari. With games like
   Super Mario World, Street Fighter II, and Donkey Kong Country, it was
   the next best thing to an arcade. And despite its popularity, the
   system's $199 price tag was relatively reasonable, especially by
   today's standards.

   12
   Wearing Hard Candy Rings on Every Finger
   hard candy nail polish, things only 90s kids remember hard candy nail
   polish, things only 90s kids remember Walmart

   Stylish kids of the '90s would rush to their local department store
   cosmetics counters to load up on Hard Candy nail polishes whenever a
   new shipment came in (though today they're easily purchased at your
   local Walmart). Sure, the polish had cool pastel and metallic colors
   and slightly risqué advertising, but it was those plastic rings on its
   nail polish bottles that really made the brand stand out.

   13
   The Excitement of Getting a New Lisa Frank Notebook
   lisa frank notebook, things only 90s kids remember lisa frank notebook,
   things only 90s kids remember Amazon

   What did neon colors, adorable puppies, and algebra class have in
   common in the '90s? They were all associated with Lisa Frank school
   supplies, the only back-to-school gear that rivaled the Trapper Keeper
   in popularity for '90s kids. (Luckily, you can still get some on Amazon
   today.)

   14
   Strapping on Your Doc Martens to Show Off Your Alternative Side
   doc marten boots, things only 90s kids remember doc marten boots,
   things only 90s kids remember Shutterstock/I Wei Huang

   Whether you were channeling your inner Lilith Fair fan or simply
   emulating Daria's iconic style, Doc Martens were a staple in countless
   closets in the '90s. The clunky combat boots went just as well with a
   pair of ripped jeans as they did with a baby doll dress.

   15
   Eagerly Taking Pollution Down to Zero with Captain Planet
   captain planet, things only 90s kids remember captain planet, things
   only 90s kids remember IMDB/Turner Home Entertainment

   Captain Planet may have been an unlikely hero, but to people growing up
   in the '90s, he was an icon. Children of the '90s couldn't wait to see
   what adventures in environmentalism this eco-crusader got up to every
   week—or show off what they learned when it came time to take out the
   recycling.

   16
   Having a Huge Crush on At Least One Saved by the Bell Cast Member
   saved by the bell, things only 90s kids remember saved by the bell,
   things only 90s kids remember Image via IMDB/NBC Productions

   Whether you loved Zack Morris' laid-back style, couldn't get enough of
   Lisa Turtle's scrunchies, or dreamed of sitting in the stands at
   Slater's wrestling match, for young adults in the '90s, there was at
   least one Saved by the Bell cast member who caught their eye.

   17
   Wishing Your Dad Was as Cool as Robin Williams in Mrs. Doubtfire
   mrs doubtfire, robin williams, things only 90s kids remember mrs
   doubtfire, robin williams, things only 90s kids remember IMDB/Twentieth
   Century Fox

   Sure, your dad was fine, save for the corny jokes and embarrassing
   socks-with-sandals combo he wore in the summer. But would he dress up
   like a British nanny and stick his face in a cake just to spend time
   with you? Doubtful.

   18
   Thinking Zima Was the Height of Adult Sophistication
   zima, things only 90s kids remember zima, things only 90s kids remember
   Walmart

   Beer and wine were fine, but if you wanted to host a truly epic
   get-together in the '90s, having a few six-packs of Zima on ice was
   non-negotiable. And if you want to host a '90s party today, you can
   still pick some up at Walmart.

   19
   Begging Your Parents for a Nickelodeon Radio
   nickelodeon alarm clock, things only 90s kids remember nickelodeon
   alarm clock, things only 90s kids remember Amazon

   If you were a kid in the 1990s, having a Nickelodeon radio alarm clock
   was just about the coolest bedroom accessory out there. Sure, it still
   went off at 6 a.m. to get you up for school, but being able to pull
   that little lever to hit snooze somehow made those early mornings a
   whole lot more bearable. You can even still purchase these
   brightly-colored clocks today on Amazon—albeit for nearly $500.

   20
   The Slap Bracelet Ban
   slap bracelets, things only 90s kids remember slap bracelets, things
   only 90s kids remember Walmart

   Did they occasionally leave a mark on your wrist? Sure. Were they
   basically just sticker-wrapped tape measures? Definitely. Did you still
   mourn the loss of your beloved slap bracelet when your teacher deemed
   it "too dangerous" for the classroom? 100 percent. And despite your
   teachers' insistence that they were practically weapons, they're still
   available at Walmart today.

   21
   Practicing the Macarena in the Mirror
   macarena dance, things only 90s kids remember macarena dance, things
   only 90s kids remember Richard Ellis/Alamy Stock Photo

   If you don't know the moves to the Macarena, did you really live
   through the '90s? Come on, even Colin Powell knew how to do it.

   22
   Having a Lip Smacker for Every Day of the Week
   bonne bell lip smackers, things only 90s kids remember bonne bell lip
   smackers, things only 90s kids remember Walmart

   The '90s spawned plenty of bad makeup trends, from frosted lipstick to
   hair mascara, but don't count Bonne Bell Lip Smackers among them. These
   lightly-pigmented lip balms—which you can still get at Walmart,
   actually—were a must-have for cosmetics enthusiasts in the '90s. The
   scent of the Dr. Pepper lip balm still conjures instant nostalgia for
   kids of this era.

   23
   Wishing You Lived in a House Like the One on The Fresh Prince of
   Bel-Air
   fresh prince of bel air, southwestern design 1990s home decor fresh
   prince of bel air, southwestern design 1990s home decor YouTube/Ghora
   Li Shui

   The height of sophistication in the '90s wasn't inspired by real
   royalty—it came from a different kind of prince entirely. Uncle Phil
   and Aunt Viv's plant-adorned mansion on The Fresh Prince had countless
   '90s kids begging their moms to shake the family tree and see if there
   were any rich relatives eager to take them in.

   24
   Thinking the Game Boy Color Was the Pinnacle of Tech Innovation
   game boy color system, things only 90s kids remember game boy color
   system, things only 90s kids remember Shutterstock/Dmitri Malyshev

   The only thing cooler than having a Game Boy in the '90s? Having a Game
   Boy Color. While its effects may seem a bit dinky by today's standards,
   seeing Kirby in his full bubblegum-pink glory or hopping over a bright
   red mushroom in Super Mario Land on a Game Boy Color was a truly
   life-changing event.

   25
   Being Obsessed with Your Colorful iMac
   imac computer, things only 90s kids remember imac computer, things only
   90s kids remember Shutterstock/Anton_Ivanov

   Sure, your average computer was cool, but if you really wanted to wow
   your friends in the '90s, you splurged on one of the colorful iMacs.
   Though their functionality wasn't significantly different than other
   computers at the time, seeing into the back of your Bondi Blue machine
   while waiting for Netscape to load felt like an amazing new adventure.

   26
   Being Disappointed when Your Discman's Anti-Skip Protection Didn't
   Deliver
   discman walkman, cd player, things only 90s kids remember discman
   walkman, cd player, things only 90s kids remember Shutterstock/Photo Oz

   Your Discman may have promised to keep your CDs from skipping. It may
   have even had a locking device on it that looked like it would keep
   your favorite mix CD safe. But as anyone who tried jogging with one can
   attest, the that anti-skip protection existed in name only.

   27
   Getting Too Spooked by Your Goosebumps Books to Fall Asleep
   Goosebumps books, things only 90s kids remember Goosebumps books,
   things only 90s kids remember Scholastic

   Your mom warned you. Your dad warned you. Your teachers warned you.
   Your school librarian warned you. But did you still read Goosebumps
   before bed, only to find yourself quaking in fear as thoughts of
   haunted carnivals and maniacal ventriloquist's dummies ran through your
   head? Of course. You can even still scare yourself silly today with a
   retro set of these creepy novels from Scholastic.

   28
   Feeling Like a Million Bucks After Getting Frosted Tips
   mark mcgrath, sugar ray, things only 90s kids remember mark mcgrath,
   sugar ray, things only 90s kids remember Shutterstock/Featureflash
   photo agency

   Doing your hair for a big night out in the '90s didn't just mean
   blow-drying it. For guys who really wanted to impress with their 'do,
   copying the frosted tips worn by numerous boy band members was the only
   way to do it. And if you want a more au courant style, start with these
   40 Ways to Have Amazing Hair Over 40.

   29
   Knowing All the Words to Weezer's Blue Album
   weezer blue album, things only 90s kids remember weezer blue album,
   things only 90s kids remember Amazon

   The '90s may have been the heyday of the boy band, but for folks who
   fancied themselves a little more alternative, Weezer's Blue Album was
   the go-to CD for any mood. Feeling upbeat? Put on "Buddy Holly." Kind
   of depressed? Play "Say It Ain't So." Going through a break-up? Your ex
   might not be there for you, but "Undone—The Sweater Song" still was.

   30
   Wondering How Those Little Gelatin Balls Floated in Orbitz Soda
   orbitz soda, things only 90s kids remember orbitz soda, things only 90s
   kids remember Image via Wikimedia Commons

   The '90s saw a lot of creativity in the beverage industry, but perhaps
   nothing was as mind-blowing as Orbitz soda. The clear sugary drink,
   which had brightly-colored gelatin balls suspended in it, was
   half-science project, half-beverage, and basically all you would beg
   your mom for when you went to the grocery store.

   31
   Dressing Like Austin Powers for Halloween
   austin powers movie, things only 90s kids remember austin powers movie,
   things only 90s kids remember IMDB/Capella Films

   Velour suit? Check. Bad fake teeth? Check. Feeling like an
   international man of mystery when you put on your oversized glasses?
   Yeah, baby!

   32
   Completely Believing Your Beanie Babies Would Make You a Millionaire
   beanie babie toy, things only 90s kids remember beanie babie toy,
   things only 90s kids remember Shutterstock/Linda Bestwick

   Kids of the '90s thought there was a practical reason behind collecting
   Beanie Babies. They were convinced that someday, those limited-edition
   bears and turtles with the tags still on would be worth a fortune—if
   they ever got around to listing them on eBay, that is.

   33
   Using "Ironic" Wrong, Thanks to Alanis Morissette
   jagged little pill, things only 90s kids remember jagged little pill,
   things only 90s kids remember Shutterstock/Featureflash photo agency

   If you ask a strict grammarian, getting 10,000 spoons when you need a
   knife or rain on your wedding day aren't ironic. They're just
   unfortunate circumstances. But Alanis Morissette's Jagged Little Pill
   told you otherwise, so you used the word to describe basically any
   bummer of a situation you saw fit.

   34
   Singing "The Log Song" from Ren & Stimpy Over and Over
   ren & stimpy cartoon, things only 90s kids remember ren & stimpy
   cartoon, things only 90s kids remember IMDB/Spümcø

   ae0fcc31ae342fd3a1346ebb1f342fcb

   Strange, subversive, and totally addictive, Ren & Stimpy was the '90s
   Nickelodeon cartoon beloved by those who wouldn't be caught dead
   watching Rugrats or Rocko's Modern Life. And for its devotees, "The Log
   Song" was a real ear worm. Everyone loves a log, after all.

   35
   Circling All the Items You Wanted from the Delia's Catalog
   delia's catalog, things only 90s kids remember delia's catalog, things
   only 90s kids remember Via Deliascatalogs.tumblr.com

   Teens in the '90s knew there was no greater excitement than getting a
   new Delia's catalog in the mail. You'd pore over the pages like it was
   Vogue's September issue, circling items you wanted and then trying to
   convince your parents that you couldn't go back to school without
   rainbow-striped track pants and a closet full of smiley-face crop tops.

   36
   Being Shocked by the Bill Clinton-Monica Lewinsky Affair
   monica lewinsky walking through crowd, things only 90s kids remember
   monica lewinsky walking through crowd, things only 90s kids remember
   Media Punch Inc/Alamy Stock Photo

   Though Bill Clinton was known for his charisma long before he entered
   the Oval Office, it was still shocking to folks who lived through the
   '90s to hear sordid details of a sitting president's sex
   life—especially one that involved 20-something intern Monica Lewinsky
   and not his wife.

   37
   Imagining What You Would Do If You Were Left Home Alone Like Kevin
   McAllister
   Home Alone film still Home Alone film still Photo 12/Alamy Stock Photo

   While going to Paris might seem like more fun than spending the
   holidays in frigid Chicago by your standards today, if you were a kid
   in the '90s, nothing seemed cooler than having your family forget you
   at home when they went on vacation—especially if it meant getting to
   try aftershave, eat endless ice cream sundaes, and fend off harebrained
   burglars.

   38
   Having a List of What Various Pager Codes Meant
   obsolete beeper, pager, things only 90s kids will remember obsolete
   beeper, pager, things only 90s kids will remember Shutterstock

   Beepers weren't just for doctors in the '90s. If you were cool enough
   to have one of these high-tech devices at the time, you wore it on your
   belt with pride. You also definitely kept a list of all the codes you
   needed to understand the messages you received on it in your pocket.

   39
   Being Crushed When Jordan Catalano Revealed His Song Wasn't About
   Angela on My So-Called Life
   jared leto, claire danes, my so-called life, things only 90s kids
   remember jared leto, claire danes, my so-called life, things only 90s
   kids remember IMDB/ABC Productions

   While it only ran for a single season, My So-Called Life was just about
   the most accurate TV portrayal of life as a young person in the '90s.
   You worried for Rayanne when she got drunk. You cried for Ricky when
   his family kicked him out. And your heart broke for Angela when it
   turned out that song Jordan Catalano wrote was just about his car.

   40
   Having LA Looks Stocked in Your Medicine Cabinet
   la looks hair gel, things only 90s kids remember la looks hair gel,
   things only 90s kids remember Amazon

   In the '90s, the spikier and wetter your hair looked, the better. To
   make sure not a strand went astray, medicine cabinets across the
   country were stocked with bottles of LA Looks gel, which are still
   available on Amazon. The product promised a serious hold on your hair
   and a just-shellacked look. And boy, did it deliver.

   41
   Being Terrified by the Temple Guards on Legends of the Hidden Temple
   legends of the hidden temple guard, nickelodeon shows, things only 90s
   kids remember legends of the hidden temple guard, nickelodeon shows,
   things only 90s kids remember IMDB/Pacific Bay Entertainment

   Going on Legends of the Hidden Temple was a dream of countless kids in
   the 1990s. The only thing stopping them (aside from their parents)? The
   not-so-minor fear of getting kidnapped by the temple guards.

   42
   Secretly Loving Aqua's "Barbie Girl"
   aqua barbie girl, things only 90s kids remember aqua barbie girl,
   things only 90s kids remember Amazon

   It may have been a silly pop song, but not only do most '90s kids know
   the words to "Barbie Girl" by heart, you probably still get a little
   pang of nostalgia when you hear it today. Truly, it's fantastic.

   43
   Trying to Figure Out a Magic Eye Picture With the Perfect Squint
   magic eye book, things only 90s kids remember magic eye book, things
   only 90s kids remember Amazon

   Was it just that your eyes focused differently than everyone else's?
   Were you cocking your head wrong? Unless you were one of the truly
   lucky ones for whom Magic Eye pictures immediately appeared, you likely
   spent hours trying to figure out how everyone else saw a sailboat where
   you just saw a psychedelic blue blur. (Luckily, if you want to practice
   your Magic Eye skills today, you can still get the books on Amazon).

   44
   Starting Your Sentences with "What's the deal with…," Thanks to
   Seinfeld
   jerry seinfeld, julia louis-dreyfus, things only 90s kids remember
   jerry seinfeld, julia louis-dreyfus, things only 90s kids remember
   IMDB/West-Shapiro, Castle Rock Entertainment

   Jerry, Elaine, George, and Kramer weren't just characters on a TV
   show—they were such a part of '90s life it almost felt like they were
   viewers' friends. And while you may not have gone out and bought a
   pirate shirt to celebrate your love for all things Seinfeld, you
   definitely borrowed the show's catch phrases from time to time.

   45
   Hearing Tickle Me Elmo's Laugh in Your Sleep
   tickle me elmo, things only 90s kids remember tickle me elmo, things
   only 90s kids remember Amazon

   Parents got in fights over it in malls. Kids wept when they didn't find
   it under the Christmas tree. And if you lived through the '90s—even if
   you didn't play with Tickle Me Elmo yourself, like this one still
   available today on Amazon—the sound of his high-pitched, mechanical
   laugh is still probably stuck in your head.

   46
   Trying to Hit the High Note in "I Will Always Love You"
   i will always love you, whitney houston, the bodyguard, things only 90s
   kids remember i will always love you, whitney houston, the bodyguard,
   things only 90s kids remember RCA Records via YouTube

   The Bodyguard was an undeniable cultural phenomenon when it hit
   theaters in 1992. The only thing more popular than the movie itself,
   however, was Whitney Houston's cover of Dolly Parton's "I Will Always
   Love You," which remains a karaoke staple for '90s enthusiasts to this
   day.

   47
   Joking About Eating Your Meals with "Fava Beans and a Nice Chianti"
   After Seeing Silence of the Lambs
   Anthony Hopkins in The Silence of the Lambs (1991) Anthony Hopkins in
   The Silence of the Lambs (1991) Orion Pictures

   While scary movies have been a staple in cinemas forever, 1991's
   Silence of the Lambs turned the genre on its head. Instead of a basic
   gore-fest, audiences got a sophisticated, even charming, serial killer
   in the form of Hannibal Lecter, as masterfully portrayed by Anthony
   Hopkins. And the movie's biggest enthusiasts got a new bone-chilling
   catch phrase.

   48
   Finding Yourself Stunned by the News of Kurt Cobain's Death
   kurt cobain of nirvana, things only 90s kids remember kurt cobain of
   nirvana, things only 90s kids remember Fabio Diena/Shutterstock

   Kurt Cobain was at the height of his fame in 1994 when the Nirvana
   front man took his own life in his Seattle home. Though Cobain had
   reportedly struggled with depression and addiction for years, it still
   sent shockwaves through the band's legion of loyal fans when the news
   of his death broke.

   49
   Wishing You Had a Job as Cool as the Kids at Empire Records Did
   Empire Records Liv Tyler Rennee Zellweger, things only 90s kids
   remember Empire Records Liv Tyler Rennee Zellweger, things only 90s
   kids remember IMDB/New Regency Pictures

   Your part-time job at Orange Julius may have made you enough money to
   buy your first car, but you longed for a gig as cool as working at the
   titular store in Empire Records. The 1995 cult classic movie not only
   made you desperate to sling CDs, it sparked countless fashion and music
   trends, from cropped mohair sweaters paired with plaid skirts to a
   reinvigorated love for the Gin Blossoms.

   50
   Gearing up for Y2K
   bill clinton y2k panic, things only 90s kids remember bill clinton y2k
   panic, things only 90s kids remember Richard Ellis/Alamy Stock Photo

   By the end of the '90s, Y2K panic was in full swing. People were
   worried that their computers would fry, their PINs would stop working,
   and that the stock market would crash. And then the ball dropped at
   midnight in 2000 and… nothing happened. But at least everyone had
   wallets full of cash, stores of canned food, and cases of bottled
   water, just in case. And for more blasts from the past, check out these
   20 Photos Only Kids Who Grew Up in the 1990s Will Understand.

   To discover more amazing secrets about living your best life, click
   here to follow us on Instagram!
   Sarah Crow
   Sarah Crow is a senior editor at Eat This, Not That!, where she focuses
   on celebrity news and health coverage. Read more
   Filed Under
   1990s • Entertainment • Fun Facts • Nostalgia
   Read This Next
     * teenage girls at a party in the 1990s teenage girls at a party in
       the 1990s

20 Slang Terms Every 1990s Kid Will Remember
       Make sure no one knocks you off your modem while you read this.
       January 2, 2021
     * The cast of Seinfeld, things only 90s kids will remember The cast
       of Seinfeld, things only 90s kids will remember

25 Funny Jokes from the 1990s That Will Make You Feel So Nostalgic
       You can't touch these punchlines.
       September 27, 2019
     * n'sync with frosted tips in the 1990s n'sync with frosted tips in
       the 1990s

20 Photos Only Kids Who Grew up in the 1990s Will Understand
       Virtually dying of dysentery? Yeah, that's a '90s thing.
       August 13, 2018

   Latest News
     * Woman eating popcorn watching Christmas movies. Woman eating
       popcorn watching Christmas movies.
       Woman eating popcorn watching Christmas movies. Woman eating
       popcorn watching Christmas movies.
       Entertainment
    The Xmas Movie You Should Watch, Based on Your Sign
       Curl up and with the holiday movie made for you.
     * Hero Boy Survives Without Food in Heavy Rainfall and
       Predator-Infested Wilderness for Six Days Hero Boy Survives Without
       Food in Heavy Rainfall and Predator-Infested Wilderness for Six
       Days
       Hero Boy Survives Without Food in Heavy Rainfall and
       Predator-Infested Wilderness for Six Days Hero Boy Survives Without
       Food in Heavy Rainfall and Predator-Infested Wilderness for Six
       Days
       Extra
    Hero Boy Survives Without Food in Heavy Rainfall and Predator-Infested
       Wilderness for Six Days
       "Looking for a needle in a haystack."
     * California Couple Whose Car Went off a Cliff Saved by iPhone's
       Emergency SOS Feature California Couple Whose Car Went off a Cliff
       Saved by iPhone's Emergency SOS Feature
       California Couple Whose Car Went off a Cliff Saved by iPhone's
       Emergency SOS Feature California Couple Whose Car Went off a Cliff
       Saved by iPhone's Emergency SOS Feature
       Extra
    California Couple Whose Car Went off a Cliff Saved by iPhone's
       Emergency SOS Feature
       This could have turned out very differently.
     * Man with Erectile Dysfunction Man with Erectile Dysfunction
       Man with Erectile Dysfunction Man with Erectile Dysfunction
       Health
    4 Common Meds That Can Cause ED, Doctor Says
       Get to the bottom of your bedroom woes.
     * Queen Elizabeth "Felt Very Low" After Prince Harry and Meghan Exit,
       Expert Claims. "Terrible Toll." Queen Elizabeth "Felt Very Low"
       After Prince Harry and Meghan Exit, Expert Claims. "Terrible Toll."
       Queen Elizabeth "Felt Very Low" After Prince Harry and Meghan Exit,
       Expert Claims. "Terrible Toll." Queen Elizabeth "Felt Very Low"
       After Prince Harry and Meghan Exit, Expert Claims. "Terrible Toll."
       Extra
    Queen Elizabeth "Felt Very Low" After Prince Harry and Meghan Exit,
       Expert Claims. "Terrible Toll."
       The Queen was very upset about the couple leaving the country.
     * Woman scratching her arm. Woman scratching her arm.
       Woman scratching her arm. Woman scratching her arm.
       Health
    Yes, Anxiety Can Cause a Rash
       Sometimes feelings can show up on your skin.

   Read This Next
     * teenage girls at a party in the 1990s teenage girls at a party in
       the 1990s

20 Slang Terms Every 1990s Kid Will Remember
       Make sure no one knocks you off your modem while you read this.
       January 2, 2021
     * The cast of Seinfeld, things only 90s kids will remember The cast
       of Seinfeld, things only 90s kids will remember

25 Funny Jokes from the 1990s That Will Make You Feel So Nostalgic
       You can't touch these punchlines.
       September 27, 2019
     * n'sync with frosted tips in the 1990s n'sync with frosted tips in
       the 1990s

20 Photos Only Kids Who Grew up in the 1990s Will Understand
       Virtually dying of dysentery? Yeah, that's a '90s thing.
       August 13, 2018

     * Follow Best Life Follow

     * Facebook Facebook
     * Twitter Twitter
     * Instagram
     * LinkedIn LinkedIn

     * Facebook
     * Twitter
     * Instagram
     * LinkedIn

     * About Us
     * Terms and Conditions
     * Privacy Policy
     * Partner Sites
     * Advertise With Us
     * Get Our Newsletter
     * Sitemap

   © 2022 Galvanized Media. All Rights Reserved. Bestlifeonline.com is
   part of the Meredith Health Group
