   #Constructed Nostalgia for Rock’s Golden Age: “I Believe in Yesterday”
   La nostalgie construite Volume !, Numéros Volume !, Documents

   Navigation – Plan du site

Volume ! Volume !

   La revue des musiques populaires

   AccueilTous les numéros11 : 1Rock & chansonConstructed Nostalgia for
   Rock’s ...

   Recherche___________ (BUTTON) Chercher
   Sommaire - Document suivant
   11 : 1 | 2014
   Souvenirs, souvenirs
   Rock & chanson

Constructed Nostalgia for Rock’s Golden Age: “I Believe in Yesterday”

   Deena Weinstein
   p. 20-36
   https://doi.org/10.4000/volume.4314

   Traduction(s) :
          La nostalgie construite [en]

   Résumé | Index | Plan | Texte | Bibliographie | Notes | Citation |
   Auteur

Résumés

   English Français

   The phenomenon of rock’s past having occluded its present is examined
   through the intentionality that grounds it culturally. Specifically,
   neo-nostalgia (Jameson) and similar postmodern terms (simulation,
   construction) constitute the intentionality and the commercial
   interests of the music industry and the generational power of the Baby
   Boomers and Gen X are the structural determinants. Neo-nostalgia for
   rock’s past is directed toward an aestheticized imaginary of rock’s
   golden age — a mythical time that never was, rather than a supposed
   eternal transcendent (religion) or an individualized empirical past
   (homesickness). Nostalgia for a construction, fabricated for corporate
   profit and generational/parental power, is a depthless and riskless
   adventure for a generation that experiences severe constraints on its
   ability to actualize the modern(ist) ideals of authenticity-novelty.

   Le passé du rock en est venu à étouffer son présent. Cet article
   examine l’intentionnalité qui, culturellement, fonde ce phénomène. Il
   montre que la néo-nostalgie étudiée par Jameson, avec d’autres éléments
   postmodernes (ceux de simulation et de construction), dirige cette
   intentionnalité, et que les facteurs structurels de celle-ci sont,
   d’une part, les intérêts mercantiles de l’industrie musicale et,
   d’autre part, le pouvoir de deux générations, celle des baby-boomers et
   de la « Génération X » – les facteurs structurels qui la déterminent.
   La néo-nostalgie pour le rock passé ne vise pas une transcendance
   supposément éternelle, comme dans la religion, ou un passé réellement
   vécu par les individus, comme dans le mal du pays. À la place, cette
   néo-nostalgie porte sur un imaginaire esthétisé, construit autour d’un
   âge d’or du rock qui n’est en fait qu’un mythe, une époque qui n’a
   jamais existé. Avoir la nostalgie d’une construction fabriquée en vue
   du profit, qui sert le pouvoir des parents, de la génération à laquelle
   ils appartiennent, n’offre actuellement aux jeunes, limités dans leur
   capacité à accomplir l’idéal moderne/moderniste d’authenticité et de
   nouveauté, qu’une aventure superficielle et sans danger.
   Haut de page

Entrées d’index

Mots clés :

   mémoire / nostalgie / rétro, âge / génération, industrie du disque /
   musicale, marketing / communication / publicité, authenticité, archives
   / rééditions / revival

Keywords:

   memory / nostalgia / retro, music / recording industry, mainstream /
   commercialism / commodification, marketing / communication /
   advertising, authenticity, age / generation, archives / reissues /
   revival

Géographique :

   États-Unis / USA

Chronologique :

   1960-1969, 2000-2009

Genre musical :

   rock music, rock‘n’roll / rockabilly
   Haut de page

Plan

   Rock Zombies Invade The Living
   Constructed Nostalgia
   Commodification of Nostalgia
   Youth without Youth
   Conclusion
   Haut de page

Texte intégral

   PDF 196k Signaler ce document
   Knebworth festival Afficher l’image

   1Nostalgia isn’t what it used to be and neither is rock. In a sense,
   rock today is even more what it used to be while nostalgia, especially
   nostalgia about rock music, has changed so much that it deserves a new
   name. It once referred to direct experience; now it is mainly a
   cultural construction, so it would be more precise to refer to it as
   cultural nostalgia. Both nostalgia and rock have had their own
   histories, the first as old as the human past itself, and, the second
   inaugurated in the middle of the last century.

   The relationship between nostalgia and rock has flipped – originally
   nostalgia was often influenced by rock, whereas today rock is impelled
   by nostalgia’s new incarnation. The following discussion traces the
   conjunction of rock and nostalgia in terms of a general (post-modern)
   cultural analysis and its social-structural grounds.

Rock Zombies Invade The Living

   2 Rock emerged and flourished under the sign of romanticism, a cultural
   moment of modernity. In contrast to traditional or “classical”
   standards of appreciation, a new rock song or artist was supposed to be
   novel, different than what was extant. That standard was built into the
   definition of modern art. As Umberto Eco put it: “The modern criterion
   for recognizing the artistic value was NOVELTY, high information” (Eco,
   1985: 161). “The concept of absolute originality is a contemporary one,
   born with Romanticism…” (Eco, 1985: 178).

   3Of course rock never was never as radically new as its aesthetic
   seemed to demand. No art form could be. Contemporary criticism has
   taught us that culture is inter-textual; no cultural object is pristine
   and sui generis (Kristeva, 1980). Even individual artists bring to any
   “new work” their sameness (name, face, signature sound, recurring
   themes, and a variety of expected tropes). More generally, genres are
   bundles of already known expectations. Nonetheless, what was privileged
   by creators, fans, critics, and media publicists in the rock world was
   what was different. If there wasn’t enough that was different, the work
   was denounced as old, tired, generic, or mass produced.

   4Over the years, indeed, differences have proliferated, new genres have
   emerged. The term “rock” has become protean, covering diverse styles
   that project contrasting sensibilities and ideologies. The meaning of
   the term rock has always been a contested one which has varied over
   time, over place (including national discourses), and by the interests
   of those wielding it. Yet rock still demarcates a discursive field that
   connects to its origins. It bears the traces of its romantic DNA, but
   seems to have undergone a transvaluation of values, an inversion of its
   standards. Rather than the new, it is the old that is privileged today.
   The change has been palpably evident and radical. It can be documented
   by studies done by the author of her students in the undergraduate
   sociology of rock course that she has taught each year since the early
   1980s. The students would be asked on the first day of class which
   bands they knew most about and which artists were their favorites.

   5Up until the mid-1990s, students reported that they knew the most
   about contemporary bands with a youth following, among which were their
   favorites. Then there was a change that was at first surprising – the
   majority of students listening to radio tuned into “classic
   rock”-formatted stations, that is, those that played rock that was very
   popular more than 15 or 30 years earlier. Bands that the students knew
   the most about were now those bands whose music was played on classic
   rock radio, and among those artists were their favorites. As students
   began to listen to their own collections of mp3s on iPods and
   computers, I asked them to estimate what proportion of those songs were
   originally released within the past 15 years. For each class, more than
   three-quarters of the students reported that more than two-thirds and
   for some as high as 90% of their collections were from periods prior to
   fifteen years ago.

   The micro-evidence from the author’s on-going studies can be abundantly
   supplemented by macro-developments that clearly point to a
   transvaluation of present and past in rock.

   6Rock radio is now dominated by the classic rock format. As major
   markets see other rock formats erased, classic rock stations seem to be
   thriving. Live rock is also dominated by dinosaurs, particularly in the
   income they generate for themselves and their promoters. Prog-rock band
   Yes is touring profitably. Bassist Rick Squire, who co-founded the band
   in 1968, recognizes the linkage between radio and the concert business.
   “We still get radio play, so I think that keeps bringing in new, young
   fans, as well as the older diehards” (Blair, 2013). These older bands
   concentrate most or all of their set list on their old hits, ignoring
   songs from (or even no longer having) recent releases. Those paying
   $355.00 (the average ticket price) to see the Rolling Stones in 2013
   find the band “playing certain old reliables again and again” (Caro,
   2013). One meme of many recent concerts is playing the whole of the
   band’s “classic” album. Yes, always known for its excesses, is true to
   form. “We don't have a new album,” Squire said, “so instead we're going
   to perform three of our classic albums - The Yes Album, Close to the
   Edge and Going for the One, all in their entirety, at each show. And
   the fans all seem to love the idea” (Blair, 2013).

   7Ticket prices for older bands are far higher than those for even
   well-known younger ones. The average concert ticket prices for artists
   well established by the 1980s “took off after the mid-1990s, …prices
   grew much faster than overall price inflation after the mid-1990s”
   (Krueger, 2005). Much like the ratio of the rich to the rest of the
   population, “In 1981, the top 1% of artists took in 26% of concert
   revenue; in 2003, that figure more than doubled to 56%.” The top 5% of
   revenue generators took in 62% of concert revenue in 1982 and 84% in
   2003. Surely, this is a superstar market if there ever was one.” “The
   number of shows performed by these superstar artists declined by 18%,
   while revenue per show increased by 60%. The increase in revenue was
   driven by both an increase in price and an increase in tickets per
   show” (Krueger, 2005).

   Rock festivals that once were the gathering of the young to see newer
   artists now feature acts that have been well known for many decades.
   The 2013 Bonnaroo festival’s headliners included Paul McCartney, ZZ Top
   and Billy Idol in addition to Wilco, and My Morning Jacket. The
   audience for these festivals tends to be mainly late-teens and
   twenty-somethings, a demographic that hasn’t changed since the late
   1960s.

   8 The major record companies are making their rock profits not from new
   releases but off their back catalogue. Sony has a whole division, Sony
   Legacy, that does very well. Sold as mp3s or as CDs that are in box
   sets, anniversary re-issues, newly remastered releases, never-heard
   recordings once deemed unfit for prior albums, and old live concerts
   (as CD or DVD); such recycled product comprises a significant portion
   of their new releases. To this considerable revenue stream is added the
   increasingly major source — licensing fees primarily from old releases
   received from sources like video games and advertisements, and
   streaming media like Pandora and Spotify.

   9Rock has always been raiding the past, but today they proudly fly
   their pirate flags. Some of the best known newer groups such as the
   White Stripes and the Black Keys have well-publicized their older
   aesthetics. New releases by older artists often point to their past in
   no uncertain terms. Remarking about David Bowie’s 2013 The Next Day,
   the New Yorker critic Sasha Frere-Jones (2013: 84) writes: “The Next
   Day uses sounds that are several decades old, particularly reverb
   settings and synthesizers that even a musical illiterate will identify
   as sounding “1980s.” Regardless of whether these markers are
   intentional, it's clear that Bowie does want you to think about time:
   specifically, the time that David Jones (his birth name) has spent
   being David Bowie.” John Fogerty’s 2013 release, Wrote a Song for
   Everyone, pairs Fogerty as song-writer and on some tracks as performer
   too, with a variety of musicians including Dave Grohl and the Foo
   Fighters, Rage Against the Machine’s Tom Morello, and Bob Seger, on
   various of Fogerty’s late-1960s hits.

   The dead, the soon-to-be-dead, those risen from the dead as re-united
   bands, and a hologram or two on the live stage – these are the zombies
   that haunt the earth, airwaves, and rock and celebrity mass media on
   paper and via the internet. In sum, rock today is awash in the rock of
   yesterday.

   10Returning to the author’s students, they were recently asked to
   respond anonymously to the questions: “Would you have preferred to live
   in the 1960s or now? Why?” Two thirds preferred to live in the sixties.
   Some of their reasons for that preference were:

     “To live in a time where music was so influential would be awesome.
     Living in the height of optimism and living off music sounds like
     fun;”
     “I like a lot of the music made in the 1960s and it seems like a
     very free and laid back period;”
     “…because the 1960s youth had the opportunity to see the most
     influential rock bands of all time”;
     “It was a time of change political, in thought, in fashion, music
     and society. I could be a part of the change or at least witness
     it”;
     “It was a time of revolution where the youth actually gave a damn
     about what is going on and actually had hope for the future. I want
     to be best friends with Bob Dylan”;
     “Youth movement, optimism, the Beatles, art, LSD;”
     “The 1960s aesthetic culturally, musically, politically seems to
     have the most people genuinely involved/learning and is most
     appealing;”
     “I am a helpless romantic with a severe case of “Golden Age
     Thinking””.

Constructed Nostalgia

   11Rock hasn’t changed to become exactly what it used to be. It carries
   a severely edited version of its past with many artists and recordings
   redacted, and others, especially those from the late 1960s and early
   1970s, bolded and underlined. On the other hand, nostalgia is something
   more than it has been with a history far older than the word itself.

     The oldest form of nostalgia, first documented in those who lived
     and died in the same community in which they were born, was for some
     mythic past. It was a past when the gods interacted with humans. In
     the Abrahamic religions, that past was described as the Garden of
     Eden. It was the home of human beings, the home of us all, a
     wonderful place-time to which we could never “return,” providing
     that dual sweet and bitter feeling that characterizes nostalgia.

   12Nostalgia’s second incarnation, adding to but not erasing that
   originary type, began once there were armies stationed or fighting for
   years in foreign lands, sailors, traders, or explorers discovering “new
   worlds,” and whole communities forced from their ancestral lands. This
   new type was a longing to return to a real, not ideal, site, in which
   people once lived. By the 17^th century, such nostalgia was understood,
   at least by the Swiss whose mercenary armies experienced it, as a
   medical problem. Many soldiers pining for home physically deteriorated
   and some died. The condition was at first called Heimweh by a Swiss
   doctor Johannes Hofer, who coined his neologism in 1688 from two Greek
   words, nost (return or home) and algia (pain) (Hofer, 1688). This
   pre-industrial denotation of nostalgia as a desire to return to one’s
   native land, or the bittersweet memories of it, persisted and is still
   in use. For example, the Irish escaping famine and populating the
   northeastern United States in the mid-nineteenth century would gather
   in shebeens and then saloons and sing Irish songs (Rosenzweig, 1983).

   Perhaps for some, the object of nostalgia is a place, but, less than a
   century later, one of Hofer’s countrymen, Jean Jacques Rousseau, would
   interpret the term in a broader way. In his Dictionary of Music,
   Rousseau said that songs, such as those sung by the Irish immigrants,
   are a “memorative sign.” Music, he argued, not only recalls a
   geographical location, but also peoples’ “former pleasures, their
   youth, and all the joys of life,” and thus “excite[s] in them a bitter
   sorrow for the loss of them” (Rousseau, 1768: 267).

   13Immanuel Kant went beyond Rousseau, contending that “what a person
   wishes to recover is not so much the actual place where he passed his
   childhood as his youth itself. He is not straining toward something
   which he can repossess, but toward an age which is forever beyond his
   reach” (Kant, 1798: 95). Rousseau and Kant comprehend nostalgia as it
   has mainly been understood in the modern world. Lunching with a friend,
   a professor of art about 50 years old, I asked him about the music he
   really liked in his late teens. He immediately responded that he was
   embarrassed that he still likes and listens to that music today,
   particularly Joy Division. Listening to that music today reminded him
   of what it did for him decades ago; it “created a sense of alternative
   possibility” – a sense that “life sucks and we like it, we’re still
   having fun.” Did that feeling, when first recognized in his youth, give
   him a strong sense of his self? “Yes, definitely.”

   14The third incarnation of nostalgia is the meaning that characterizes
   the current period and that applies to the domination of rock’s past
   over its present. Whereas originary nostalgia was directed toward a
   mythical “golden age” that was deemed to have existed and was lost, and
   modern nostalgia refers to an individualized experienced past that can
   no longer be recovered, contemporary nostalgia is a construct of the
   communications media that is directed to a simulation of a
   de-individualized empirical past that never existed as such and is not
   directly part of the lives of the individuals who experience the
   nostalgia.

   15Contemporary nostalgia is neither for everyone’s personal past nor
   for a concrete individual’s life history, but for a social
   construction. It is constructed nostalgia that the students who would
   prefer to have lived in the 1960s or in some later decades of the
   twentieth century, feel (e.g. “I would have rather been a teenager in
   the late 1970s in NYC, so I could hang out with Talking Heads”). Past
   rock functions here as a “memorative sign” for a representation, a sign
   for a sign. As Pickering and Keightley (2006: 929) grasp it,
   contemporary nostalgia is self-referential: the individual who feels it
   is engaged in a process of “mediated nostalgic remembering.”

   In his commentary on Frederic Jameson’s discussion of nostalgia in
   postmodernity, Brown defines Jameson’s notion of “neo-nostalgia” as
   “the pseudo-historical appeal of a bygone aesthetic.” That appeal “is
   achieved by stylistic evocations and temporal stereotypes, which convey
   various forms of past-ness”(Brown, 2001: 310).

   16Nostalgia for rock’s past is a form of “mediated nostalgic
   remembering.” There was, indeed, an empirical past of rock, but it has
   been taken up in the present as mediated and then re-mediated to
   create, for example, the 1960s as a set of selective representations in
   which some artists, music, and events are highlighted and others
   eliminated. In that process of selection and simplification, nostalgia
   is aestheticized – it becomes a pose that can be felt intensely, but
   that does not connect the individual to an “eternal tradition” or to a
   personal history, but to an image lacking insistency.

   17Aestheticized nostalgia for past rock lacks seriousness in the sense
   that it does not instigate any attempt by those who feel it to try to
   recreate the past, except sporadically and episodically. To dwell in
   the constructed golden age is to experience its culture as an imaginary
   (similar to originary nostalgia), but also as the survival of an
   empirical past in which there is interest but no commitment.

   That aestheticized nostalgia should have come to be the dominant
   intentionality towards rock might be an irony, since rock’s ideology
   privileges authenticity and novelty as the requisites for having one’s
   own music that expresses oneself and one’s generation. How could this
   reversal have happened?

Commodification of Nostalgia

   18Why has rock’s past swamped its present? Why is rock today mired in
   neo-nostalgia? There are two major structural determinants of this
   constructed nostalgia. The major one is economic, essentially,
   commercial capitalism doing what it is supposed to do. Each of the
   companies that comprise the complex of the rock industry is focused on
   maximizing its own corporate profits. Various and interrelated changes
   beginning in the 1990s — legal, demographic, and technological —
   created a situation in which the most rational strategy for rock’s
   major mediators was to concentrate attention on a subset of rock bands
   from prior decades (‘legacy bands”) while giving short-shrift to newer
   rock artists.

   19Of rock’s two primary mediators — corporations that bridge the gap
   between musicians and their potential audiences — one is involved in
   recording music and the other in presenting it live. Before music can
   be heard on the radio or bought in one format or another such as CDs,
   record labels have enabled rock bands to record their songs. Record
   companies, highly concentrated into fewer and fewer conglomerates, have
   divisions for all types of music, not merely rock. During the late
   1990s they saw the proportion of sales of rock records decrease. There
   were several reasons for declining rock sales, and the labels” reaction
   to that trend insured that rock sales would decrease even more.

   20There had been a sharp increase in sales of rock recordings from the
   mid-‘80s through the mid-‘90s, in part due to new styles developed in
   local scenes and/or by indie record labels. By 1991 the majors stepped
   in and bought the contracts of those bands and also purchased some of
   the labels. The influence of SoundScan’s precise measurement of what is
   currently “hot” and the dismantling of “artist-oriented labels” in
   favor of huge conglomerates like Time-Warner (which then had to jump to
   Wall Street’s dictates), made for a “Hollywood blockbuster-type
   mentality, with an emphasis on who opened big and what records quickly
   ‘fail’” (Moerer, 1998: 76). Rather than developing innovative new
   artists, the companies signed newer bands that fashioned themselves
   after existing popular bands (Pearl Jam clones were especially
   numerous).

   21MTV was no longer around to introduce new styles and artists, as that
   station had done in the 1980s. The station found that it would earn
   more money if its programming units were thirty minutes long rather
   than a three-minute video, and so it scheduled “Beavis and Butthead,”
   “The Real World,” and other non-music content. Not only was the time
   devoted to videos reduced, but by 1997 rock music videos were all but
   eliminated in favor of pop, hip-hop, and R&B. Rather than leading, MTV
   was now risk-averse. Rolling Stone reported in 1996 that MTV would not
   be airing videos unless the record was in heavy rotation on rock radio
   and selling well (Boehlert, 1996: 20).

   22At the same time as MTV was eliminating rock, rock radio formats
   other than “classic rock” were in sharp decline. Talk/Sports/News and
   Spanish-language programming have been the fastest growing formats
   (Farhi, 2005). Here too there were several reasons for the change.
   Firstly, demographics were shifting; the cohort of white youth, the
   traditional audience for new rock, was declining. In 1990 non-Hispanic
   whites made up 75.15% of the population 15-19 year olds; a decade
   later, they comprised only 63.11%. Similarly, 20-24 year olds went from
   76.36% to 61.14% non-Hispanic whites over the course of that decade
   (U.S. Bureau of the Census).

   23Rock radio was also impacted by the Telecommunications Act of 1996,
   allowing companies to own unlimited numbers of stations (Clear Channel
   acquired more than 1,200), and as many as eight stations in a major
   market. The bottom line was the preoccupation of corporate suits, and
   not even long term profits, but quarterly results. As a consequence,
   formats were changed to maximize advertising revenue, including highly
   tightened playlists (Moerer, 1998). Such “corporate consolidation has
   made radio more bland, with endless commercials and shrinking
   playlists” (Farhi, 2005). It was no wonder that rock radio’s overall
   share of the audience tumbled (about 13 percent from 1999 to 2004).

   Given the lack of appeal of current rock radio to its traditional
   audience and the shrinking demographics of that audience, radio
   corporations switched to other formats, especially talk/news/sports.
   Today there are major markets with only one rock radio station, and its
   format is classic rock.

   24The changes in demographics and in rock radio prompted major labels
   put more money behind pop acts that promised fast and lucrative and
   returns – signing and supporting fewer newer rock acts. Profits
   continued to be made with rock recordings that had been new some
   decades ago. The labels’ back catalog could be resold as CDs that had
   been remastered, or collected in “best of’s and box-sets. Yet feeding
   on the past by record companies was limited by changes in record
   retailing in the late 1990s. Traditional record stores that sold back
   catalog, were being put out of business, first by large chains, and
   then by mass merchandisers (especially Wal-mart and BestBuy). These
   stores didn’t stock much back catalog, and cut back on their CD-space
   to make room for more lucrative movie DVDs.

   25 The net earnings for major record labels reached their peak in 1999
   (14,585,000). Cutting back on developing new rock bands, the impact of
   changes in retail, and the internet led to a steep decline. The
   companies’ net income decreased by about 50% from its 1999 peak to
   2010’s $6,995,000 (R.I.A.A.). The record industry blamed internet file
   sharing, which they called “piracy.” Of course their back catalog
   started to pick up and do rather well when Amazon entered the picture,
   with its nearly infinite shelf space. Then, in 2003, iTunes allowed
   purchase of mp3s with immediate downloading.

   26 Despite the lack of rock radio other than classic rock, some rock
   fans took to listening to the numerous rock formats on satellite radio
   networks (Sirius and XM, now merged). The internet allowed rock fans to
   listen to radio stations that had put their programming onto the net
   from anywhere in the world. And, of course, they could download songs
   in mp3 format on very small portable players and more recently via
   their smart phones. Streaming music services like Pandora and Spotify
   have also become popular.

   27 Sales of mp3s did bring revenue to labels, but of a very different
   sort than in rock’s heyday. Rather than having to buy a whole album, at
   10$-16$, digital downloads allowed purchase of individual songs.
   Historically, many fans had bought physical albums (vinyl LPs,
   prerecorded cassettes, and CDs) because that was the only way to get a
   desired song. Now with the chance to buy just the one song for 99
   cents, they did so. Labels and artists lost 90% of what they might have
   earned before digital downloads. Much of their physical sales, and
   those make far greater profits, are of box sets, re-releases, and live
   concerts from legacy acts.
     * 1 About 80-90 percent of most releases, do not cover their costs of
       production. It is the few that do (...)

   28 The internet changed rock in many ways. New bands could record and
   distribute without having a label to underwrite them, yet lacking the
   label’s clout, they could not become big stars. Fans could indulge
   their taste in any rock genre from any era. The impact on major labels
   was that rock still sold, but did not create blockbuster sales for any
   one recording. And it is from blockbusters that labels make their
   profits.1

   The number of albums, in all styles of music, selling one million or
   more units in a year has continued to decline in the current century
   (Peoples, 2010). Despite having no albums in the top ten best sellers
   of the year, rock still managed to comprise 47.6% of album sales in
   2011 and 49.6% in 2012 (Neilsen, 2013).

   29 One can characterize the history of record labels’ relations to rock
   with that old scouting song: “Make new friends and keep the old, one is
   silver and the other gold.” The rock industry began creating new
   artists, but by the mid-1970s it was following that song, keeping the
   old while making the new. The silver and gold made their profits soar
   in the 1970s, and, with the help of MTV and CDs, in the 1980s the
   industry’s profits headed for the stars. But by the latter part of the
   1990s, the majors abandoned making the new rock stars, in favor of
   Britney, Beyonce, Miley, Jay-Z, and Beiber. Their rock business since
   the late 1990s is refining and recycling gold.

   30The second main mediator of rock is the live concert promoter. Like
   radio stations and recording companies, concert promoters have merged
   to form oligopolies. Major rock bands were sought after by the
   promoters who controlled increasingly larger stadiums that these bands
   were sure to sell-out. And the top artists among these mainly
   decades-old bands could name their price – the promoter would merely
   raise the price of tickets. Given that recordings were not selling
   well, bands were anxious to make money from their live shows.
   (Previously, concerts were seen as advertisements for the latest album,
   so ticket prices were low since the money would be made with the
   recordings. Today, the reverse is true; insofar as bands, rather than
   record labels, control the price of their recordings. (Leaking the
   recording onto the pirate sites was sometimes done by those working for
   the band.)

   31Just because there are strictly commercial reasons for major record
   labels, radio stations, and concert promoters to favor old (classic)
   rock over new, does not mean that they would be successful in getting
   rock’s past to swamp its present. Pursuing their interests has merely
   kept classic rock available to be heard and/or seen by potential
   audiences. To make audiences desire the “back catalog,” they have also
   had to promote rock’s past and construct a simulation of the past that
   would instigate neo-nostalgia.

   That is exactly what the big players have done, aided and abetted by a
   host of secondary mediators. They have contrived an “aura,” to use
   Walter Benjamin’s (1969) term in a way he would not have anticipated,
   to surround the rock of a “golden age.’

   32Rock writers (a.k.a. rock critics, rock journalists, rock publicists)
   collectively create that aura. In interviews, and in reviews of albums
   and especially concerts, they construct an imaginary of their subjects.
   Sharing their collectively constructed celebrity texts of these “rock
   greats,” they conjure up an aura around a past that they have
   aestheticized.

   33Writers and documentarians, accompanying the major record labels,
   concert promoters and classic rock djs, create an auratic imaginary of
   rock’s past that breeds neo-nostalgia. These hypesters of the canon
   create some Golden Age that never was, but can be heard in this $100
   box set, or seen for a few hours and $355 in person. These writers and
   their imaginaries are found in the documentaries on particular bands,
   rock history itself, or a rock festival like Woodstock that are shown
   on TV and sold as DVDs. They are the writers of rock biographies and
   box-set liner notes.

   The efforts of these mediators create not only a mythic rock past, but
   mythic bands. Branding is more than words, including iconic pictures of
   the musicians in their prime, and band iconography. Fans pay to display
   the band’s logos (such as AC/DC’s), icons (like the Rolling Stones’
   lips), or album cover images on merchandise, especially T-shirts.

   34Rock writers are also contributors to those ubiquitous “Best of,”
   “Greatest” lists that are the staple of rock and general entertainment
   magazines, in print and online. Examining 38 lists of the “100 greatest
   albums of all time,” Appen and Doehring (2006: 34) found that the
   majority of the recordings were released between 1965-1969.

   These imaginaries also make their way into the general news and
   entertainment media, when a mega-tour is launched or one of the
   musicians is seriously ill or dies.

   35Death is the great career move in rock, as the posthumous careers of
   Elvis, Morrison, Hendrix, and Lennon, for example, have shown. They
   were exceedingly lucrative and enhanced their fame of the deceased.
   They are also free of all connection to an actual living human being,
   so the subject appears only as a mediated construction, open to endless
   manipulation and refinement.

   Mass media reports on the death further reinforce that
   nostalgia-inducing imaginary. The innumerable TV, radio, magazine, and
   newspaper accounts of Lennon’s death referenced not the man and the
   four decades in which he lived, or even the nearly two decades in which
   he was a famous performer. Instead, he was entombed in the mythical
   1960s. His fans and media reporters repeated the refrain that with his
   death, “the sixties are over” (Mäkelä, 2004). This construction of the
   “1960s” is what the students reference in their desire to return to
   that Golden Age.

   36Rock critics also are the ones who are consulted in deciding upon the
   contents of rock museums such as the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in
   Cleveland or the Experience Music Project in Seattle. Simulating and
   selecting out a set of cultural artifacts construct a golden age
   imaginary that is also found in Hard Rock Hotels and Cafes.

   The imaginary is also alive and well in video games like the Guitar
   Hero and Rock Band franchises. These simulations foster neo-nostalgia
   for an aestheticized golden age, a simulation itself. Hodson’s analysis
   of the Beatles Rock Band Game is illustrative. “The game produces a
   false sense of community and history which encourages a hyperreal
   relationship to commodity over community” he writes (Hodson, 2012: 72).
   “Rather than just a commodification of play, Beatles Rock Band is a
   game that also commodifies nostalgia” (Hodson, 2012: 81).

   37For Jameson, neo-nostalgia is a matter of substituting an
   imaginary/construction/simulation/myth for what actually presumably
   happened at some time in the past. Neo-nostalgia takes that
   construction as its object and then judges the present to be inferior
   to the construction — it would have been better to live then, but at
   least I can be entertained by the (aestheticized) myth. The music
   industry is more than happy to have initiated and to perpetuate that
   myth.

Youth without Youth

   38Even all the hype generated by the rock industry and its associated
   cultural mediators would not guarantee the current hegemony of rock’s
   past. Aside from the operation of commercial interests, a major social
   factor — the power of the Boomer generation especially in the US —
   insured that hegemony. The cultural power of the baby-boomers is a
   second structural foundation for constructed nostalgia.

   39The most obvious factor in boomer-power is the fact that Boomers
   along with the slighter cohort born during WWII, were the youth that
   created, sold, mediated, and were fans of the music now called classic
   rock. They were the generation that began rock criticism and some of
   those initiators are still involved in that occupation. More
   significantly, they hired, trained and edited younger rock scribes.
   With their reviews, “best-of’/’greatest” lists, and institutions like
   the Grammy Awards and the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, they have created
   and disseminated the “canon” and made the myth of rock’s golden age.

   40Beyond those involved in the rock industry, Boomers were more
   generally crucial to a variety of socio-cultural changes. This cohort
   of those born after WWII was unusual in several ways. One was its
   overwhelmingly large size. Growing up in an expanding economy, the
   Boomers became targets for a large swathe of commercial interests
   purveying pro-youth ideology along with their products and services.
   Unlike prior youth cohorts, they did not look forward to becoming
   adults in the extant society. They came of age with the civil rights
   movement, learning that the American creed was hypocritical when it
   came to the treatment of non-whites. The civil rights movement provided
   a model (tactics and ideology) for the various movements focused on the
   interests of and led by youth, such as the free speech movements at
   universities and the anti-war movement. Adults were held to be
   responsible for an unjust world that activist youth proposed to reform.

   41Adolescent and college age youth in the 1960s had, like prior
   generations, their own culture – clothing and hair fashions, slang, and
   music. Yet theirs wasn’t merely a youth subculture with different
   values than the general culture, including parental culture. They can
   be said to have taken the 1950s teenage rebellion against their parents
   out of the home and into the streets. They were a counterculture,
   intent on having their values replace the older ones for everyone.

   42The Boomers were more successful in changing elements of the general
   culture than in challenging economic or politic power structures. And
   their fight against adults / strong attachment to their youth continued
   as they themselves aged. “Don’t trust anyone over thirty,” was a war
   cry of the student movement in the mid-1960s. At the same time, “I hope
   I die before I get old” was a key line to “My Generation,” a hit song
   by the Who. Although they had no choice but to age out of chronological
   youth, they maintained the anti-adult stance by grasping onto the most
   attainable substitute, “youthfulness.”

   43Rock was a marker of youth culture, and many Boomers did not give up
   their rock, listening to it, or to the newer music made by the bands of
   the late 1960s and early 1970s. Their music was, in Rousseau’s (1768:
   267) term, a “memorative sign”, creating a sense of nostalgia, in
   Kant’s sense, “toward an age which is forever beyond his reach” (Kant,
   1798). As these bands began to be seen as “great” aesthetically, they
   and their music became by the late 1970s an integral component of
   modern culture itself. Those who were too young to have lived in the
   “golden age” could became fans of “classic rock” as many of the
   canonical bands put out new records and toured in support of them.

   44Starting in the late 1970s, Gen-X began a new youth culture, but
   until the late 1980s it was mainly underground and under the radar of
   mainstream media. Its music was seen and heard in college towns and
   released on independent labels, hence the terms indie and college rock.
   Gen-Xers also saw through the hypocrisy of the older generation, and
   fought for justice and equality. They were ignored by the mainstream
   media until a few of their new bands made their music sound more
   commercial and were picked up by major labels. Re-branded as
   Alternative rock, R.E.M., Nirvana, Pearl Jam, and Smashing Pumpkins
   were among the commercially most successful. It has turned out that
   Gen-X was the last generation before neo-nostalgia buried new musical
   initiatives by young people.

   45A new generation that faced a different situation than Gen-X was
   coming into adolescence in the mid-1990s. They were a smaller cohort,
   particularly if we subtract non-Hispanic whites. They were omnivores,
   claiming to “like everything” when asked about their favorite music,
   and seeming to identify themselves more with new digital technologies
   (the internet, iPods, video games, “social media,” and smart phones)
   than with any specific content. Called Gen-Y or Millennials, these
   middle-class youth were close to their parents, who both indulged them
   with new technology and protected (‘helicopter parents”) them more than
   any other youth group had been.

   In my classes, I learned that parents were admired and seen as cool. It
   was in early 1997 that one student remarked that their taste in music
   was shaped by and was the same as their parents. Classic rock radio was
   this cohort’s favorite format. Industry insider and rock writer Hank
   Bordowitz (2006: xiv) polled several college classes at a New Jersey
   state college and found that more than half of them listened to a
   classic rock station. By the new century, it was no longer unusual to
   hear that students’ favorite bands were those in the “canon,” and that
   they went to legacy rock shows — whose ticket prices could feed a
   family of four for a week — with their parents.

   46The major financial “crisis” in 2008, from which the U.S., and other
   post-industrial countries had not recovered when this article was
   written in 2013, gave the Millennials even less power. They had no
   assurance that they could maintain, much less exceed, the same standard
   of living provided by their parents. They encountered fierce
   competition for the few good jobs available, and they had been
   over-protected by adults. Many of them have moved back home with their
   parents after college or else live on their own with parental support.
   Millennials and the society in general are not optimistic about the
   future.

   47The commercial, economic, and cultural power of the Boomers/Gen-Xs
   over their children has created a reversal of the pattern in which
   young people reject the music of their parents and affiliate with
   “their own music” — the rock current during their adolescence. Behind
   that reversal is the stealing of “youth” from the young by the parental
   generation, which has substituted the effect of “youthfulness” for
   actual youth itself — another aestheticization and simulation that
   accompanies and is bound up with neo-nostalgia.

Conclusion

   48The preceding sociological essay has examined the phenomenon of
   rock’s past occluding its present from the viewpoint of the
   intentionality that is integral to it and how that intentionality has
   been fostered by social-structural commercial and generational
   determinants. The phenomenon is noteworthy because it marks a reversal
   of the modern(ist) interpretation of rock — and to a certain extent its
   actual cultural history — as a continual displacement of rock’s past by
   a new wave of genre transformation coinciding with the rise of a new
   generational cohort of youth.

   49 It would be unthinkable before the present century that rock’s past
   would overtake its present and capture the sensibilities and musical
   preferences of young people. Rock’s intentionality at its inception was
   the youth social (not political) rebellion against the tastes of the
   parental generation. Rock is now at a polar opposite position: youth
   now embraces the older generation’s tastes.

   50 There are persuasive reasons for the reversal — the “back catalog”
   seems endlessly susceptible to profitable commercial exploitation, and
   the Boomer and then Gen-X parents were bound and determined to preserve
   their youth if only as the aesthetic of youthfulness. The corporate and
   parental co-construction of an imaginary of rock’s golden age, in the
   context of commercial and generational power, seduced, in Baudrillard’s
   sense, youth.

   51 Neo-nostalgia — Frederic Jameson’s precise contribution to
   postmodern discourse — is the framing intentionality of the event of
   rock’s past occluding its present. (New rock has not disappeared: it
   even flourishes on the periphery and under the radar of major media.)
   Jameson’s theoretical move is to have epitomized the line of discourse
   on the counter-tendency of the accumulating past to undermine the
   modern cultural drive to novelty. Initiated in Nietzsche’s Use and
   Abuse of History (1957) and extended beyond the mere stifling effect of
   an overhanging past in Baudrillard’s Simulations (1983), the critique
   of the modern culminates with its subjective component in
   (neo)nostalgia.

   52 The myth of rock’s “golden age” is an aetheticization of rock’s
   past, existing purely on the surface as a fashion. It is a depthless
   adventure; for the intentionality of neo-nostaglia, one might wish that
   one had lived in some fabled era of rock’s past, but that wish incurs
   no consequences. One does not descend into homesickness because no home
   as been lost, and one does not try to recreate the life of the “golden
   age,” or even more to the point, seriously worship it. One is, perhaps
   a bit wistfully, entertained by the packaged-in-imaginary recycled
   artifact.

   53Neo-nostalgia for rock’s past is a riskless adventure.
   Haut de page

Bibliographie

   Appen, R.V. & Doehring, A (2006), “Nevermind the Beatles, here's Exile
   61 and Nico: “The top 100 records of all time” – a canon of pop and
   rock albums from a sociological and aesthetic perspective”, Popular
   Music, vol. 25, n° 1, 21-39.

   Baudrillard, J. (1983), Simulations, New York, Semiotext(e).

   Blair, I. 2013. “Rockers Yes back on tour with old songs, new ideas”,
   Chicago Tribune, 6 March, sect. 4, 2.

   Benjamin, W. (2008), L'Œuvre d'art à l'époque de sa reproductibilité
   technique, Paris, Gallimard, coll. “Folio Plus Philosophie” [1939].

   Boehlert, E (1996), “Buzz been: Did radio kill MTV's video star?”,
   Rolling Stone, 2 May, n° 733, 18-20.

   Brown, S. (2001), “The Retromarketing Revolution: L’Imagination au
   Pouvoir”, International Journal of Management Review, vol. 3, n° 4,
   December, 303-320.

   Caro, M. (2013), “Keep rolling?”, Chicago Tribune, 5 juin, sect. 4, 1.

   Bordowitz, H. (2006), Dirty little secrets of the record business,
   Chicago, Chicago Review Press.

   Eco, U. (1985), “Innovation and Repetition: Between Modern and
   Post-Modern Aesthetics”, Daedalus, vol 114, n° 4, automne, 161-184.

   Farhi, P. (2005), “Rock, rolling over: Pressured by other formats and
   ways of listening, a radio staple is crumbling”, Washington Post, 18
   January. En ligne ;
   http://www.edisonresearch.com/homeimg/archives/WashingtonPost01-18-05.p
   df [5 October 2014].

   Frere-Jones, S. (2013), “Labyrinth: The path that leads from David
   Bowie to us”, The New Yorker, 18 March, 84-85.

   Hodson, J. (2012), “When I'm Sixty-Four: Beatles Rock Band and the
   Commodification of Nostalgia”, Loading… The Journal of the Canadian
   Game Studies Association, vol. 6, n° 10, 72-89.

   Hofer, J. (1688), Dissertatio Medica de Nostalgia, Bâle, J. Bertsch
   [cited in Starobinski].

   Kant. E. (1986), Anthropologie du point de vue pragmatique, in Œuvres
   complètes, vol. III, Paris, Gallimard, “Bibliothèque de la Pléiade”,
   937-1144 [1798].

   Kristeva, J. (1980), Desire in Language: A Semiotic Approach to
   Literature and Art, New York, Columbia University Press.

   Krueger, A. B. (2005), “The Economics of Real Superstars: The Market
   for Rock Concerts in the Material World”, Journal of Labor Economics,
   vol. 23, n° 1, 1-30.

   Mäkelä, J. (2004), John Lennon Imagined: Cultural History of a Rock
   Star, New York, Peter Lang.

   Moerer, K. (1998), “Who Killed Rock Radio?”, Spin, February, 74-78.

   The Nielsen Company & Billboard's 2012 Music Industry Report (2013), 4
   janvier. Online:
   http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20130104005149/en/Nielsen-Company
   -Billboard's-2012-Music-Industry-Report.pdf [4 October 2014].

   Nietzsche, F. (1957), Use and abuse of history, Tr. Adrian Collins,
   Indianapolis, Bobbs-Merrill [1874].

   Peoples, G. (2010), “Analysis: Important Sales Trends you Need to
   Know”, Billboard.biz, 2 juin. Online: http://www.billboard.biz [4
   October 2014]

   Pickering, M. & Keightley, E. (2006), “The Modalities of Nostalgia”,
   Current Sociology, vol. 54, n° 6, November, 919–941.

   R.I.A.A. Online: www.riaa.com [4 October 2014].

   Rosenzweig, R. (1983), Eight Hours for What we Will, New York,
   Cambridge University Press.

   Rousseau, J.-J. (2012), Dictionnaire de Musique, Genève, Slatkine
   [1768, cited in Starobinski].

   Starobinski, J. (1966), “The Idea of Nostalgia”, trans. W.S. Kemp,
   Diogenes vol. 54, 81-103.

   U.S. Bureau of the Census. Online: www.census.gov [4 October 2014].

   Discography

   John Fogerty (2013), Wrote a Song for Everyone, Vanguard.

   The Who (1965), My Generation, Brunswick.
   Haut de page

Notes

   1 About 80-90 percent of most releases, do not cover their costs of
   production. It is the few that do so, and sell in the millions, that
   cover the costs of all of the others, and provide the labels profits.
   Haut de page

Pour citer cet article

Référence papier

   Deena Weinstein, « Constructed Nostalgia for Rock’s Golden Age: “I
   Believe in Yesterday” », Volume !, 11 : 1 | 2014, 20-36.

Référence électronique

   Deena Weinstein, « Constructed Nostalgia for Rock’s Golden Age: “I
   Believe in Yesterday” », Volume ! [En ligne], 11 : 1 | 2014, mis en
   ligne le 30 décembre 2016, consulté le 17 décembre 2022. URL :
   http://journals.openedition.org/volume/4314 ; DOI :
   https://doi.org/10.4000/volume.4314
   Haut de page

Auteur

Deena Weinstein

   Deena Weinstein is Professor of Sociology at DePaul University in
   Chicago specializing in popular culture with a focus on rock music, and
   social and cultural theory. Her rock publications include Heavy Metal:
   The Music and Its Culture (New York: DaCapo, 2000) and a few dozen
   scholarly articles and book chapters on various dimensions of rock
   music. Beyond academic discourses, she is a rock journalist,
   concentrating in metal. Her theory interests center on Georg Simmel's
   cultural and formal sociologies that resulted in the book
   (Post)-Modernized Simmel (London: Routledge, 1993) and other
   publications.
   Haut de page

Droits d’auteur

   Tous droits réservés
   Haut de page
   Sommaire - Document suivant

Navigation

Index

     * Auteur
     * Mots clés
     * Géographique
     * Chronologique
     * Genre musical
     * Artiste

Derniers numéros

     * 19 : 1 | 2022
       La scène de Canterbury
     * 18 : 2 | 2021
       Experts - Non Experts
     * 18 : 1 | 2021
       Back to work !
     * 17 : 2 | 2020
       Le monde ou rien ?
     * 16 : 2 / 17 : 1 | 2020
       La voix pop

Numéros en texte intégral

     * 0 : 0 | 2020
       Silencing Science
     * 16 : 1 | 2019
       Musique & hacking
     * 15 : 2 | 2019
       Paradoxal Metal
     * 15 : 1 | 2018
     * 14 : 2 | 2018
       Watching Music
     * 14 : 1 | 2017
     * 13 : 2 | 2017
       Inna Jamaican Stylee
     * 13 : 1 | 2016
       La scène punk en France
     * 12 : 2 | 2016
       Special Beatles studies
     * 12 : 1 | 2015
       Avec ma gueule de métèque
     * 11 : 2 | 2015
     * 11 : 1 | 2014
       Souvenirs, souvenirs
     * 10 : 2 | 2014
       Composer avec le monde
     * 10 : 1 | 2013
       Écoutes
     * 9 : 2 | 2012
       Contre-cultures n°2
     * 9 : 1 | 2012
       Contre-cultures n°1
     * 8 : 2 | 2011
       Sex Sells, Blackness too?
     * 8 : 1 | 2011
       Peut-on parler de musique noire  ?
     * 7 : 2 | 2010
       La Reprise BIS
     * 7 : 1 | 2010
       La Reprise dans les musiques populaires
     * 6 : 1-2 | 2008
       Géographie, musique et postcolonialisme
     * 5 : 2 | 2006
       Les Scènes metal
     * 5 : 1 | 2006
       La Presse musicale alternative
     * 4 : 2 | 2005
       Musiques actuelles : un “pas de côté”
     * 4 : 1 | 2005
       Musiciens-sociologues
     * 3 : 2 | 2004
       Sonorités Hip-Hop
     * 3 : 1 | 2004
       Le Savant à l'épreuve du populaire / Musiques électroniques
     * 3 : 0 | 2004
       Rock et Cinéma
     * 2 : 2 | 2003
       French Popular Music
     * 2 : 1 | 2003
     * 1 : 2 | 2002
     * 1 : 1 | 2002

Tous les numéros

La revue Volume !

     * Les Éditions Mélanie Seteun & Volume !
     * La Rédaction & le Comité de lecture
     * Volume! in English!
     * Instructions aux auteurs, processus éditorial et diffusion
     * Acheter / s'abonner

Informations

     * Contacts & Crédits
     * Informations : citation, reproduction, diffusion
     * Nos liens
     * S’inscrire à la newsletter de Volume !
     * Actualités
     * Archives
     * Politiques de publication

La collection "Musique & Société"

     * La collection sur OpenEdition Books
     * « Plus que la musique… »
     * Disorder
     * Politiques des musiques populaires au xxi^e siècle
     * Sound Factory
     * Technomedia
     * Quand le rap sort de sa bulle
     * La Radio et ses publics
     * Stéréo
     * Le Monde du rock
     * La Production de la culture
     * Hard rock, heavy metal, metal
     * Les mots distordus
     * Un Maquis techno
     * Bruyante Techno
     * Les Nouveaux Courants Musicaux
     * Stand Down Margaret!

La collection "Musique & Environnement Professionnel"

     * Présentation
     * Les pratiques collectives en amateur dans les musiques populaires
     * L’emploi permanent dans les lieux de musiques actuelles
     * La coopération entre projets de musiques actuelles
     * La diffusion dans les lieux de musiques actuelles
     * Actions culturelles et musiques actuelles

Vibrations

     * Vibrations. Musiques, médias, société

Appels à contribution

     * Appels en cours
     * Appels clos

Suivez-nous

     * Flux RSS Flux RSS

Lettres d’information

     * La Lettre d’OpenEdition

Affiliations/partenaires

     * OpenEdition Journals

   ISSN électronique 1950-568X

   Voir la notice dans le catalogue OpenEdition

   Plan du site – Contacts & Crédits – Informations : citation,
   reproduction, diffusion – Nos liens – S’inscrire à la newsletter de
   Volume ! – Flux de syndication

   Politique de confidentialité – Gestion des cookies

   Nous adhérons à OpenEdition – Édité avec Lodel – Accès réservé

   (BUTTON)

   Rechercher dans OpenEdition Search

   Vous allez être redirigé vers OpenEdition Search
   ____________________
   ( ) Dans tout OpenEdition
   (*) Dans Volume !
   (BUTTON) Rechercher

     * Français
          + English

     * Partager
          + Facebook
          + Twitter
          + Google+

   ">
   (BUTTON)

     * Accueil
     * Catalogue des 605 revues

   OpenEdition Search
   (BUTTON) Tout OpenEdition

   (BUTTON) Français
     * English

   Portail de ressources électroniques en sciences humaines et sociales
   OpenEdition
   Nos plateformes
   OpenEdition Books OpenEdition Journals Hypotheses Calenda
   Bibliothèques et institutions
   OpenEdition Freemium
   Nos services
   OpenEdition Search La lettre d'OpenEdition
   Suivez-nous
