   IFRAME: //www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-WH9FTL

   skip to main content

   Keep your benefits and access to leading information – renew your APA
   membership.

     * APA.org
     * APA Style
     * APA Services
     * Divisions

     * About APA
     * Events
     * Join APA

     * Help
     * MyAPA
     * (Log Out)
     * Log In
     * Cart

   American Psychological Association Logo American Psychological
   Association Logo
   Menu

   [Entire Site____]
   ____________________

     Members
     Topics
     Publications & Databases
     Science
     Education & Career
     News & Advocacy
     About APA
     Events
     Join APA
     Help

   Home // News & Advocacy // Podcasts // Speaking of Psychology //
   Speaking of Psychology: Does nostalgia...

Speaking of Psychology: Does nostalgia have a psychological purpose?

Episode 93 – Does Nostalgia Have a Psychological Purpose?

   What psychological purpose does nostalgia serve? Is it good or bad? Are
   we more nostalgic today in our hectic, connected world? Is there such a
   thing as the “good ‘ol days”? Here to help explain is Krystine Batcho,
   PhD, professor of psychology at LeMoyne College in Syracuse, New York.
   She’s an expert on nostalgia and developed the Nostalgia Inventory, a
   survey that assesses proneness to personal nostalgia.

About the expert: Krystine Batcho, PhD

   Krystine Batcho, PhD Krystine Batcho, PhD, is a professor of psychology
   at LeMoyne College and a licensed psychologist. She makes regular
   contributions as an expert on the Psychology Today website. Her
   research has ranged from early work in human-computer interaction to
   the impact of higher education on the development of moral and social
   responsibility. Her current research on the psychology of nostalgia
   began with her introduction of the Nostalgia Inventory, a survey that
   assesses proneness to personal nostalgia. The Nostalgia Inventory has
   been translated into multiple languages, made available as an app and
   has been used in numerous research studies. Her scholarly publications
   have been widely cited, and she is frequently interviewed by the media
   on topics of current interest, including the impact of social media.
   She teaches courses in cognitive psychology, learning, and decision
   making and mentors student research.

Streaming Audio

   IFRAME:
   //html5-player.libsyn.com/embed/episode/id/11755613/height/90/theme/cus
   tom/thumbnail/no/direction/backward/render-playlist/no/custom-color/87A
   93A/

Video

   IFRAME: https://www.youtube.com/embed/T_NulVf7YqA?rel=0&showinfo=0

Transcript

   Kaitlin Luna: Hello and welcome to Speaking of Psychology , a biweekly
   podcast from the American Psychological Association that explores the
   connections between psychological science and everyday life. I'm your
   host, Kaitlin Luna.

   Nostalgia, that longing feeling for the past when things seemed better,
   easier, and more fun. It's the feeling behind countless number one
   hits. It's what's resurrecting old TV shows and being capitalized on by
   politicians. We all know the feeling. Some of us maybe a little too
   well. What psychological purpose does nostalgia serve? Is it good or
   bad? Are we more nostalgic today in our hectic connected world? Is
   there such a thing as the good old days? Here to help explain is Dr.
   Krystine Batcho, professor of psychology at LeMoyne College in
   Syracuse, New York. She's an expert on nostalgia and develops the
   nostalgia inventory, a survey that assesses proneness to personal
   nostalgia. Welcome, Dr. Batcho.

   Dr. Krystine Batcho: Thank you so much. I love talking about nostalgia.
   Thank you for inviting me.

   Luna: Absolutely. Absolutely, we look forward to hearing all about it.
   As a psychologist and a researcher of nostalgia, how do you describe
   nostalgia?

   Batcho: That's a very important question because today many people are
   researching nostalgia, but they might be using the word differently. In
   fact, some people are probably talking about a slightly different
   experience or construct. I'm pretty faithful to the origins of the word
   nostalgia. The word was coined or invented a long time ago, over 300
   years ago, and originally designated homesickness. Well, semantic drift
   over the centuries has broadened that to the notion of longing for or
   missing aspects of a person's personal lived past. That is the kind of
   nostalgia or that is what I mean when I talk about nostalgia and it's a
   wonderfully complex paradoxical experience.

   Luna: Can you talk about the role of nostalgia in the human psyche. Why
   do we have that feeling?

   Batcho: Most of the research available today including my research
   argues that nostalgia serves a number of functions. The thing that ties
   them all together is that nostalgia is an emotional experience that
   unifies. One example of this is it helps to unite our sense of who we
   are, our self, our identity over time. Because over time we change
   constantly we change in incredible ways. We're not anywhere near the
   same as we were when we were three years old, for example. Nostalgia by
   motivating us to remember the past in our own life helps to unite us to
   that authentic self and remind us of who we have been and then compare
   that to who we feel we are today.

   That gives us a sense of who we want to be down the road in the future.
   The other way that nostalgia serves an essential psychological function
   is that it is a highly social emotion. It connects us to other people.
   It does that and so many beautiful ways. In the beginning, when we're
   very young, it's part of what bonds us to the most important people in
   our life, our parents, our siblings, our friends. As we go through
   life, it can broaden out and extend to a wider sphere of the people we
   interact with. It's a social connectedness phenomenon and nostalgia is
   in that sense a very healthy pro-social emotion.

   The other way that it's unifying is that it helps us to unify what
   otherwise would be felt or experienced by us as conflicts. In itself,
   it is somewhat of a conflict because as I define it is a bitter-sweet
   emotion. It's sweet because we're remembering the best times, the good
   times of our life. The bitterness comes from the sense that we know for
   sure that we can never really regain them, they're gone forever. The
   irreversibility of time means that we absolutely cannot go back in time
   so it helps us to deal with the conflict of the bitter longing for what
   can never be again together with the sweetness of having experienced it
   and being able to revisit it and relive it again.

   Luna: You've explained that there's two different kinds of nostalgia.
   There's the personal which we've just touched on and historical. Can
   you explain what each one is?

   Batcho: In fact today, many people are arguing that there are even more
   varieties of nostalgia but when I first began collecting empirical
   evidence in the mid-1990s, I knew that another inventory existed. It
   was put together by a psychologist named Holbrook. That one contained
   items that were more oriented toward history and society across the
   years. That is the type that I refer to as historical nostalgia. The
   evidence shows that someone who experiences historical nostalgia might
   even have an emotional attachment to or longing for times in history
   that predate their own birth. That is very different from personal
   nostalgia.

   Personal nostalgia means that you are longing for or feeling good about
   aspects of your life that you already live through and have stored in
   your memory. My original data, in the beginning, demonstrated that
   individuals can be experiencing a lot of one type of the nostalgia and
   maybe not much of the other. They're relatively non-correlated or
   independent phenomena. They're not the same thing.

   Luna: Your research has shown that nostalgia can be a stabilizing force
   and comfort us during times of change and transition. Can you explain
   that a bit more?

   Batcho: Yes, change whether it's good change or negative change. We
   know that it's stressful. It's very difficult to grasp change, because
   in some sense, at a very deep psychic level, change threatens us. It's
   a little frightening because we're not 100% sure that we can control
   it. One of the most important aspects of being a healthy human being is
   having a sense that you are in control of things. When things start to
   change, either very substantially, such as major events in a person's
   life, getting married or getting divorced, getting a new career, going
   back to school or graduating from school, it's comforting to have a
   nostalgic feeling for the past that reminds us that although we don't
   know what the future is going to bring, what we do know is that we know
   who we have been and who we really are.

   It's a very comforting emotion. It also brings back; it stimulates
   memories of the times when we were accepted and loved unconditionally.
   That is such a powerfully comforting phenomenon, knowing that there was
   a time in life when we didn't have to earn our love, or we didn't
   deserve it because we earned a certain amount of money or we were
   successful in a certain venue. Our parents, for example, or our
   siblings or our friends simply loved us unconditionally. That is a
   wonderfully comforting feeling when we're undergoing any kind of
   turmoil in our personal lives.

   Luna: When you're going through a difficult experience or a new change,
   as you mentioned, you might find yourself thinking a lot about memories
   from the past, is that correct to say?

   Batcho: Absolutely. For instance, many people will tell you that if
   they're at a major event, graduation, a wedding, christening for a
   baby, very often what is happening is they have an entire flood of
   their mind with all the nostalgic memories that come to be relevant to
   this situation. When a parent is sitting in the audience, and they
   watch their child graduate, they cannot help but remember when that
   child was little and needed help putting their shoes on and thinking
   how far that person has come in life.

   In a way, Nostalgia is like a measurement. It's a way we keep track of
   things, we monitor progress through life, not just for ourselves, but
   even for other people to whom we are very attached.

   Luna: I want to flip that on the other side a bit and talk about
   today's political climate where many people are longing to return to
   "the good old days" in the United States. What does this say to you as
   a nostalgia researcher?

   Batcho: It tells me a couple of things. First of all, different people
   have that kind of sense of wishing for the good old days for different
   reasons. Let's say, someone who is old enough to have lived through,
   for example, the 1950s, they might actually be experiencing some
   personal nostalgia because they're remembering how they and their
   family celebrated holidays, or what it was like going to school in the
   mid-1950s. That phenomenon would be very, very different for a younger
   person, for example, a member of the millennial generation. For them,
   it's not personal nostalgia, it's historical. Historical nostalgia, in
   my research, suggests is more likely triggered by dissatisfaction with
   the present.

   If people are unhappy for any reason with how things are today, they're
   more likely then to experience this sense that things must have been
   better in the past. How far they have to go in terms of their longing
   can depend upon how much they know about history. Some of this gets
   handed down through stories from grandparents and some of it gets
   handed down through films that people watch or even literature that
   they've read. Someone could, for example, become enamored of a period
   in history such as Victorian days, not because they've lived through
   them, obviously, but because they have become romanticized and
   idealized in a way in literature and in film.

   That kind of phenomenon is very, very different from someone who says,
   I think that today is a very stressful time, and when I was growing up,
   I think it was less stressful. The reason for that is because our
   memories are not faithful. They're not accurate to what things really
   were like. They're our impressions of what things were like in the
   past.

   Luna: You want to expand on a little bit more. Do you think people are
   remembering the, quote, good old days accurately because a lot of you
   might say your life is worse, and this is the United States speaking
   of, it's worse than it was 60 years ago, in the 1950s are glamorizes
   being this ideal moment in time probably immortalized in a show like
   Leave It to Beaver or something like that. When you think about that,
   the experience of the 1950s of some people in America was probably
   wonderful, but the experience of other people at that time was probably
   terrible.

   I'm thinking were white Americans experienced 1950s in one way. People
   of color experienced it in a totally different way. Women experienced
   it in one way, men experience another. Can you talk a little bit more
   about that like are we overly romanticizing that period of time in this
   country today?

   Batcho: That is an excellent question. We have decades of cognitive
   research that show that the general default is that memories are not
   accurate, and that's true for all kinds of memories. When we think
   about retrieving memories, for example, if we want to retrieve what do
   we remember about the 1950s or whatever period in history that we've
   lived through, we can be very selective. When you think about a time
   period in society, it has so many components to it. One individual
   might be nostalgic for that time, but they're not thinking about things
   like racism or discrimination or even conflict. For example, the baby
   boomers, some of them were hippies during the 1960s, and when they get
   nostalgic for Woodstock, they might not be really thinking about the
   anti-war protests and some of the violence that occurred at that time.
   They're selecting out the parts of that. They might be thinking about,
   oh, I had wonderful friendships then or they might be thinking about
   some of their early romantic relationships.

   We pick and choose. The memory process not only is selective, but it
   also distorts to some extent. We do idealize things on occasion. By the
   way, this is a two-edged sword because just as we can idealize and
   romanticize and therefore distort the accuracy of memories, we can go
   in the other direction. One of the reasons I find nostalgia so
   fascinating is because I have an interest in connecting the theoretical
   research in the laboratory to people's lived experiences because of
   clinical applications.

   Some people find that their memories tend to go the other direction
   when they're remembering the past. They're always thinking of the
   negative aspects. Then they might distort that and say, "Oh, as a
   child, my parents didn't love me. They didn't give me toys. They were
   very mean to me. My friends bullied me," but actually, if we had a
   videotape of their childhoods, we might find that that's not
   necessarily totally accurate. Their childhood might not have been any
   different from their siblings' childhood. That makes us ask a question.
   Then why are some individuals selectively romanticizing the past
   whereas others are actually exaggerating its negative aspects?

   That led me in the early research that I did to look at generations to
   some extent. I was interested in looking at the greatest generation,
   many of whom grew up as children during the Great Depression. I
   interviewed people who had experienced quite a bit of financial
   hardship. When they talked about their memories of their childhood,
   they, in fact, did talk about only being able to eat bread on many
   days. That idea that they recognize that their childhood was one of
   deprivation, one of hardship, you might say, does that factor into how
   nostalgic they would be then for those days? The answer to that is much
   more complicated than I thought it would be. I thought that those
   individuals would have the least amount of nostalgia. It turns out that
   it probably depends upon two things.

   One is an individual's personality or their psychological well-being in
   the first place. If you have two individuals one of whom is really
   happy in their current life and they're emotionally doing just fine.
   They might go back and remember bad things and then laugh about them
   and say wow we've come a long way since those days haven't, we. Now we
   have a big Thanksgiving feast and we have all this food. I remember
   being six years old not having enough to eat. Whereas someone else who
   is suffering from something like depression or an anxiety disorder.
   They might go back and think about the past and then let that further
   sadden them rather than make them happy by comparison with how far
   they've come.

   Luna: That's really fascinating. One thing I do my touch a little bit
   more to like, why do we remember something so positively something so
   negatively? Because you say it might depend on the person's mental
   state, how they're doing in life. It's just so fascinating how we can
   look back on an experience and say, even if it was bad you can go back
   and look at an experience and focus on the positive aspects of it.

   Batcho: Yes, exactly. That is fascinating. I think that there are at
   least two levels at which you can ask that question. One level is when
   someone is sitting in private just reminiscing. There it is very
   important to think about their current mood state. Because we have mood
   dependent memory effects. When you're sad, you're more likely to think
   of sad memories. When you're happy, you're more likely to think of
   happy memories. On the other level, we have a social element and
   establish it is a social experience. If you're hanging out with friends
   and reminiscing about the days back in high school or college or
   whatever. Now, depending upon what your friends say in that social
   setting that might trigger you to either be more positive or more
   negative. In a way, one really good piece of advice is for people who
   are starting to feel stressed out or lonely, or sad.

   It's very important to try to gravitate toward people who stimulate the
   best of what you can bring to today from your past. In other words, if
   someone is always bringing you down by saying, "Do you remember when we
   didn't have enough to eat? Do you remember when somebody was unkind to
   us?" That person is an influence on our memory retrieval processes and
   we're more likely then to experience nostalgia in a negative way. On
   the other hand, if you're hanging out with people who are laughing
   about the funny times and the times when something embarrassing
   happened, everyone loves to share their most embarrassing moment. In
   that social setting when it's jovial and people are feeling good about
   it and finding the lessons learned from it. Now, that might bring out
   the best of nostalgic memory.

   Luna: It's interesting that a lot of it is dependent upon humans around
   you. That's really interesting.

   Batcho: Yes, it is. I think it's of great importance today because some
   of the current survey data have suggested that especially for the
   millennial generation and other adults, there is a great deal of
   reported loneliness. Some people suspect that has a little bit to do,
   not entirely but a little bit to do with the Internet or cyberspace and
   social media. The argument is there are 24 hours in a day. How do you
   spend those hours? People who grew up before the Internet their days
   were spent largely either alone or with other people face to face.
   That's no longer the case. We have an incredible amount of time spent
   in cyberspace. Even when you're connecting to other people in a social
   way, you're connecting to them at a distance. I believe that the
   psychological distancing can make people feel lonelier than they would
   have felt had they spent exactly the same amount of time having a cup
   of coffee with that person face to face. I think that the social
   element needs to be explored and researched even more heavily given the
   great proportion of time that young adults are spending, not in actual
   face to face, but in virtual reality.

   Luna: Yes. There's so many throwbacks, if you will, happening today
   like I'm talking about the TV shows that are being rebooted or were
   popular in the '90s bands from long ago have reunited and are going out
   on tour. There's places like Buzzfeed often feature, top 20 lists like
   top 20 toys from the 1980s that sort of thing. People really flock to
   that and want to share their memories of certain toy. I was wondering
   from your perspective, what that tells us about people today. Is it
   really because of we're hyper-connected all the time or could it be
   people are more nostalgic today is that we have access to sharing these
   memories with a lot of people all at once through the internet?

   Batcho: That is a complicated question and I think there are several
   reasons for the retro-phenomenon that has become somewhat of a fad. I
   think on one level it tells us based upon the research that there's
   something people feel is missing in the current lifestyle and that what
   is missing might be this social connectedness up close and personal. On
   the other hand, it might be that people are losing track of their sense
   of purpose and meaning and the nostalgia, one of its healthiest
   functions is to keep us on track with regard to the meaningfulness of
   our lives.

   Data suggests that nostalgia facilitates our understanding of meaning
   in life and so in a way when we look at all the reboots and people
   going back to the past, it might be telling us that people aren't 100%
   satisfied with the current lifestyle. There's something that might be
   missing on a much more pragmatic, lower level. You might argue that a
   lot of this is because we can suddenly, it has become so accessible
   with social media. All it takes is for one person to post something
   from the past and raise a question. Judy, do you remember watching this
   old TV show or I wonder whatever happened to and before. What, it can
   go viral and we have the technology now to really immerse people in
   these reboots and then spin-offs, et cetera.

   Until it stops making profit, I think we're going to see this for a
   while. I don't think it's going to continue on unabated, however.

   Luna: Is there some element of infectiousness to nostalgia? I mean, we
   talked about obviously people have more access to seeing these things
   online and they can share it, but even people, if they're physically
   together, does it become something that spreads from one person to the
   other?

   Batcho: I believe it can be actually. I wish it were more infectious.
   I'll tell you what I mean by that. I think is infectious when you have
   a group of people who have some shared experience. The best example of
   that are when a group of friends are reminiscing about their antics,
   the things they did as either teenagers or children or what have you.
   There it's a bonding experience. Another example of that is we know
   from current research that sports fans love to do that. They talk about
   the games that they enjoyed and when their team was victorious. When
   you have a common bond, it can be very infectious and it's like a
   domino one memory triggers another.

   The reason why I say I wish it were more infectious is because that can
   break down when you have a group of people who do not have shared
   experiences to be nostalgic about. Suddenly if you have one individual
   wanting to reminisce about his or her own past experiences, but no one
   else in that group remembers those things or lived through those
   things. In, a long time ago people talked about generation gaps.
   Someone is talking about the 1950s a millennial says, Oh, I don't even
   know what you're talking about. I don't know that TV show.

   I never saw that this can actually alienate other people because people
   don't necessarily want to hear about your nostalgic memories. They want
   to share their own. That's why I say I wish it were a little more open
   because we have so much to learn from one another's nostalgic memories.
   That's why I encourage people when they find themselves in a situation
   such as you're reminiscing about your past and other people start
   drifting away because they're bored, you might start asking them about
   theirs and start a conversation, a dialogue. In that sense, you can
   broaden it out a little more.

   Luna: Can this nostalgia be a destructive force that can really
   incubate anger, isolation or hatred? It seems like it could have that
   potential

   Batcho: Most of the research suggests that nostalgia is aligned with or
   correlated with very soft, pro-social emotions such as compassion,
   empathy, altruism. It's unlikely, generally, to be associated with
   hostility or anger. Can it be isolating? That's a very interesting
   question because you could argue that if you find yourself, the victim
   of or a survivor of very unique circumstances and now you're nostalgic
   for a time before that, other people might not be able to relate to
   you. You might or might not have the motivation to leave your past
   behind.

   That led me to doing the qualitative analysis of memoirs of people, who
   had survived under wartime conditions. What's particularly interesting
   to me is that, when those individuals recount how they had to adapt to
   significant change. In some cases became relocated, not by their own
   choice but because of conditions of war. They became, for example,
   refugees or they had to emigrate. Initially, in the early stages, they
   almost had a psychic block against accepting a new culture, a new life.
   They almost wallowed in their nostalgic memories of the past and found
   as time went on that that became very isolating. Because the people
   they were among, were not able to share that.

   What leads ultimately to a healthy kind of nostalgia is the one where
   the positive pro-social aspects of nostalgia can reconnect us now. Not
   just to people in our past but to the people we're dealing with today.
   That is possible, that can happen. All the memoirs that I've studied,
   have demonstrated how that happens. It happens by confronting the past
   with the current situation in trying to find what were the lessons we
   learned from our past that we can now tweak, update, customize and use
   to cope with the turmoil and the conflict in the change that we've gone
   through to sort of be more optimistic towards the future.

   The other aspect of this is that some people are looking at what they
   might refer to as social nostalgia and looking at groups and having
   designs where they're comparing intra-group versus inter-group. In
   those situations, you're perhaps talking about a slightly different
   phenomenon.

   Luna: Can nostalgia hold us back by keeping us dwelling on the past?
   Can it really impede what is happening in the current moment and in the
   future?

   Batcho: When I began collecting data, that was the prevailing belief
   among theorists. Before people started collecting empirical evidence,
   it was just assumed. In fact, much of the psychoanalytic thought that
   predated behaviorism and modern or contemporary social science argued
   that it would be regressive try to revisit your past. That the danger
   was that if your past is better than your present, why would you not
   just then stay there? Well, once I began collecting data and then other
   people, of course, have extended this even worldwide, what we find is
   that generally speaking, that is not what happens.

   I've thought a great deal about this and most of the research I've
   covered it looks like this. Nostalgia is bittersweet. Why did it evolve
   that way? If you take a social evolutionary perspective, it would make
   perfect sense that we would want to revisit our past so that we always
   learn from it. At the same time, we don't want to stay in the past. The
   sweetness entices us to revisit our past. Once we're there, the
   bitterness of knowing that actually it no longer exists reminds us that
   we must return to the present. That makes us want to return to the
   present.

   My argument is that it's almost never, at least the research suggests
   it would be extremely unlikely for someone to want to remain in the
   past. If someone found themselves being trapped in the past, that
   suggests that they're experiencing some sort of difficulty. It could be
   that they're undergoing a very intolerable current situation in their
   life and they might seek counseling to help them deal with that because
   they're using nostalgia then or their memories as an escape. For the
   most part, most people my research shows, because nostalgia is a social
   emotion it is actually correlated with or associated with healthy
   coping mechanisms such as seeking out others when they're having
   difficulties. We, in fact, when we revisit our memories, we try to
   remember how other people in our lives solved problems in the past and
   then use that as a role model for how we want to solve the problems
   we're experiencing today so it's generally healthy.

   Luna: How does age affect a person's feelings of nostalgia? Is it
   across the board or is it older or younger people?

   Batcho: My original data set suggested that there is a bump in
   nostalgia where it peaks not in old age as many theorists would have
   expected but peaks in young adulthood. Most theorists argue that the
   reason for that increase in nostalgia during young adulthood is because
   it's such a pivotal developmental transitional period. It is literally
   the time when a person has one foot still back in their childhood and
   one foot anticipating their move into complete adult independence.

   While they have a little bit of their identity still aligned with or
   connected to their past, they are eager to forge ahead and for that
   reason, there is a lot more frequency of nostalgic reminiscence going
   on because there's a bit over reluctance out of trepidation. Will my
   future be as wonderful and as rosy as my past was? We know that
   transitional periods including developmental ones trigger nostalgia.

   Some newer research is suggesting that there might be a smaller but
   another bump in older individuals and that is because they're watching
   a significant change in their own lifestyle from when they were for
   example in terms of physical well-being or physical health completely
   in the prime of their health versus looking ahead toward aging as well
   I might not be able to be as active as I once had been or maybe they're
   suffering with physical conditions or disorders that limit some of
   their lifestyles. For that reason, they would also become more
   nostalgic.

   Luna: Do you think nostalgia has always been a part of the human
   experience?

   Batcho: When I first did literature review in order to put together my
   nostalgia inventory, I was really impressed to find references to
   nostalgia before it ever had the name nostalgia and those references go
   back thousands of years. You can find in literature all kinds of
   examples of people who were in some sense nostalgic for sometimes their
   home or their homeland and that fits the original definition of it as
   homesickness but also in terms of longing for the past and therefore
   the argument is that it's universal. It probably is part of the human
   experience, so it's always been there as a potential. It cuts across
   all cultures and all historical time periods.

   Luna: That's really fascinating. Also can you just-- Now you've touched
   on it a few times, can you explain your nostalgia inventory and how you
   use it in your research?

   Batcho: Yes, because I define nostalgia as a longing for or missing for
   one's personal past, I comprised it of items that asked people to what
   extent they missed something from their past. Some of the items on the
   inventory are really conceptual or abstract such as missing the
   innocence of childhood or missing the freedom from having
   responsibilities. Others are more concrete missing your toys, missing
   pets that you had in your former days and it turns out that there
   really are probably two factors within it.

   One which is a more concrete set of things that we miss from our past
   and the other being a little more abstract a little more conceptual and
   I argue that nostalgia is an umbrella that covers both of those. My
   inventory measures it in a way that connects people to missing their
   own past and that is not correlated with inventories that look at it
   more as a historical type of experience or social event.

   Luna: I might also go back to where we're talking a little bit more
   about the memories, how they can be both positive and negative.

   Batcho: Yes.

   Luna: In a previous episode, we did Episode 91 how memory can be
   manipulated. We featured memory expert, Dr. Elizabeth Loftus. She
   explained that memories can be manipulated under the right conditions.
   What are your thoughts on that and how that can affect our levels of
   nostalgia about the past?

   Batcho: I agree. I agree completely. I think that to some extent, how
   we interpret our past, how we comprehend, can change. We can have
   retrospective comprehension or interpretation of our memories. That
   depends upon what purpose we're trying to serve in our present. If
   someone is trying to find a reason to feel loved or worthy of love,
   then they might have a guided sense through their own historic memories
   of looking for the times when they were loved. Maybe even doing an
   analysis of. I wonder if something went wrong or was I partly
   responsible or two, I just have bad luck?

   A good example of that would be if someone is undergoing a breakup of
   an important relationship. Now, they might be motivated to have
   nostalgic memories either of that relationship and saying, gee, how did
   we come to this unhappiness when we were so passionately in love in the
   beginning? There are researchers now looking at relationship nostalgia.
   It can be helpful to some extent but on the other hand, if you're using
   it as a way of almost arguing that you want out of the relationship.
   You say, "Well, the reason why I am leaving this relationship is
   because when I compare my satisfaction with it today, with how much joy
   I got out of it in the beginning, I see that it's been all downhill."

   I'm arguing here that our motivations can actually influence how we
   remember the past and how we interpret the meaningfulness of our past.

   Luna: Just to wrap this up for our listeners. We've touched on a lot of
   different areas of nostalgia. I want to know, is there a way for
   society to collectively use nostalgia to better itself? How can we
   tangibly benefit from it?

   Batcho: I think it's really a very important resource and it's
   underutilized. I say that even though we have all these spin-offs and
   reboots and we have a lot of nostalgia. If you use a search engine for
   the term nostalgia, it is incredible. You can find maybe near 300
   million hits on that search engine but just because you have a lot of
   something doesn't mean that you're using it effectively. We could start
   to incorporate it more effectively, I believe. Not just in media,
   that's one great vehicle. We can also look at how we can use it in
   social media, in cyberspace, but also in education and perhaps in
   parenting.

   One of the healthiest forms of nostalgia throughout human history has
   always been to connect each generation to the next. In that sort of
   bond, you pass down to the next generation, the best of the past. Just
   because we are oriented toward progress, doesn't mean that there isn't
   something of value that we might have forgotten from the past. A good
   example of that would be to say that all the technology that has been
   developed recently, is absolutely wonderful. All the progress in
   medicine has saved so many lives. We are almost obsessed with
   future-oriented progress. The only risk that brings us is the risk of
   wondering whether we've made certain trade-offs.

   Are there things that were present before that were either not doing as
   effectively today? For example, are we helping young children develop
   empathy for others and empathy for those who are different from
   themselves as effectively as we might? There are many possible
   practical tools. It used to be that when parents had children, they
   relive their own nostalgic memories by reading children's books that
   they had read to them to their own children. Then when they became
   grandparents doing the same for their grandchildren, because the
   millennials have delayed marriage and children and family size has
   shrunk, we might be having a little bit of a deficit in those kinds of
   intergenerational transmissions.

   I think that we can learn a lot from that and wonder how we can now
   tweak that replicate it today so that we don't just look across
   generations, but we look across cultures. We look across differences of
   opinion and diverse ideologies. So, what can we find that is a common
   bond so that we can get along with one another better than perhaps some
   people think we're getting along with one another today. Because
   differences can be divisive, nostalgia could be in a way part of the
   cure because nostalgia does the opposite. Instead of dividing, it
   unites.

   Luna: There's a lot of great things that nostalgia can do for us if we
   just hone in on that and try to utilize it as you just mentioned.

   Batcho: Yes, absolutely.

   Luna: Thank you so much for joining us, Dr. Batcho. We really
   appreciate your time. It has been a really very interesting topic. I
   think our listeners will really enjoy.

   Batcho: Thank you so much. I really enjoyed it myself.

   Luna: Before we go, I want to remind you that we want to hear from you.
   You can e-mail your comments and ideas to speakingofpsychology@apa.org.
   That's speaking of psychology all one-word dot org. Please consider
   giving us a rating in iTunes, it really helps. Speaking of Psychology
   is part of the APA podcast network which includes other informative
   podcasts like APA Journals Dialogue about new psychological research
   and Progress Notes about the practice of psychology. You can find all
   of our podcasts on iTunes, Stitcher, or wherever you get your podcasts.
   You can also go to our website SpeakingofPsychology.org to listen to
   more episodes. I'm Kaitlin Luna with the American Psychological
   Association.
   Date created: November 2019
   Speaking of Psychology

Download Episode

   Episode 93: Does Nostalgia Have a Psychological Purpose?

   Save the MP3 file linked above to listen to it on your computer or
   mobile device.
   All episodes

Speaking of Psychology

   Speaking of Psychology is an audio podcast series highlighting some of
   the latest, most important, and relevant psychological research being
   conducted today.

   Produced by the American Psychological Association, these podcasts will
   help listeners apply the science of psychology to their everyday lives.

Subscribe and download via:

   Apple
   Listen to podcast on iTunes

   Stitcher
   Listen to podcast on Stitcher

   Spotify
   Listen to podcast on Spotify

About the host: Kaitlin Luna

   Kaitlin Luna was the host of Speaking of Psychology from September 2018
   to March 2020. A former broadcast journalist, she worked in APA's
   Office of Public Affairs as a public affairs manager.
   ADVERTISEMENT
   ADVERTISEMENT

Contact APA Office of Public Affairs

   Contact APA Office of Public Affairs
   Advancing psychology to benefit society and improve lives
   APA Logo
   PSYCHOLOGISTS
   Standards and Guidelines
   PsycCareers
   Divisions of APA
   Ethics
   Early Career Psychologists
   Continuing Education
   Renew Membership
   STUDENTS
   Careers in Psychology
   Accredited Psychology Programs
   More for Students
   ABOUT PSYCHOLOGY
   Science of Psychology
   Psychology Topics
   PUBLICATIONS & DATABASES
   APA Style
   Journals
   Books
   Magination Press
   Videos
   APA PsycInfo
   APA PsycArticles
   More Publications & Databases
   ABOUT APA
   Governance
   Directorates and Programs
   Press Room
   Advertise with Us
   Corporate Supporters
   Work at APA
   Contact Us
   More APA Websites
     * ACT Raising Safe Kids Program
     * American Psychological Foundation
     * APA Annual Convention
     * APA Services, Inc.

     * APA Merch Store
     * APA PsycNet^®
     * APA Style^®
     * Online Psychology Laboratory

   Get Involved
   Advocate
   Participate
   Donate
   Join APA
   Follow APA
   more
     * Privacy Statement
     * Terms of Use
     * Accessibility
     * Website Feedback
     * Sitemap

   © 2022 American Psychological Association
   750 First St. NE, Washington, DC 20002-4242  |  Contact Support
   Telephone: (800) 374-2721; (202) 336-5500 | TDD/TTY: (202) 336-6123
