   #alternate alternate alternate

   [EN]
   (BUTTON) ✕

Privacy & Transparency

   We and our partners use cookies to Store and/or access information on a
   device.We and our partners use data for Personalised ads and content,
   ad and content measurement, audience insights and product
   development.An example of data being processed may be a unique
   identifier stored in a cookie. Some of our partners may process your
   data as a part of their legitimate business interest without asking for
   consent. To view the purposes they believe they have legitimate
   interest for, or to object to this data processing use the vendor list
   link below. The consent submitted will only be used for data processing
   originating from this website. If you would like to change your
   settings or withdraw consent at any time, the link to do so is in our
   privacy policy accessible from our home page.

   (BUTTON) Manage Settings (BUTTON) Continue with Recommended Cookies
   Vendor List|Privacy Policy

   Skip to Content

   (BUTTON) Search Magnifying Glass
   Search for: ____________________ Search
   (BUTTON) Close Search ×
   (BUTTON)

     * Categories
          + Community
          + Creativity
          + Inspiration
          + Leadership
          + Motivation
          + Self Improvement
          + Society
          + Social Impact
          + Storytelling
          + Writing
     * Articles
     * About

   brilliantio

Why Do I Keep Thinking About My Youth

   By: Author Valerie Forgeard

   Posted on April 7, 2022

   Categories Self Improvement, Memory, Mind, Motivation, Purpose,
   Thinking

   Many people remember the “good old days” with nostalgia, others with
   tears in their eyes because those childhood days were good or bad or so
   different from today’s world. We all have different opinions about
   everything, but one thing is for sure, we all go back down memory lane
   at some point!
   Memory Quotes Page 2

   Please enable JavaScript
   Memory Quotes Page 2
   Contents show
   1 What Can Bring You Back to Your Youth
   1.1 Sure, those photos can breathe life into you just when you need it,
   but can we really be inspired by others who didn’t even witness our
   personal experiences?
   2 Some Childhood Memories Can Be Happy, Others Can Be Painful
   3 It’s Normal to Have Memories or Thoughts of the Past
   4 Sometimes We Look for Answers
   5 Childhood Trauma That Needs Attention
   6 The Past Is a Real Thing
   6.1 The Past Doesn’t Just Disappear
   6.2 We Cannot Control How Our Lives Began but We Can Control Our
   Present and Our Future
   7 Nostalgia Is Helpful When It Leads Us to Be Grateful for What We’ve
   Achieved
   8 When You’re Feeling Down, It Can Often Help to Look Back on Fond
   Memories
   8.1 It Might Even Motivate You to Make Progress on Your Current Goals!
   9 Don’t Use Nostalgia to Run Away From Your Problems
   10 Childhood Memories Can Hold Important Information That Helps Us
   Navigate Our Lives Now
   10.1 It’s Also Common to Have Vivid Images From Our Childhood That May
   Not Be Pleasant
   11 Remembering the Past Is an Important Part of Overcoming Problems
   12 How remembering your youth can be usefulHow Remembering Your Youth
   Can Be Useful to Your Future
   13 Sometimes Our Memory Tricks Us
   13.1 We Have a Selective Memory
   14 How to Remember Parts of Your Youth That You’ve Forgotten
   15 What Thinking About Your Youth Can Do to You
   15.1 The Past Can Even Be a Good Thing if We Use It to Better
   Understand Our Present Selves
   16 Actions You Can Take From Remembering Your Youth
   17 Life Is a Journey
   17.1 My philosophy of life is that whatever happened before we’re not
   here to win or experience the good only, but to learn.
   18 Related Articles

What Can Bring You Back to Your Youth

   We all have moments in our lives that are important to us. No matter
   who we’re or what we do, we’ll always remember those moments. If you
   ever wonder where you’ve been or what you’ve done, all you’ve to do is
   go back and look at your photos.

   When we think about our past, we often have a few photos with us. These
   pictures may be from a specific time period in our lives or even from
   different decades. How you relate your old photos to your current life
   is entirely up to you; perhaps they’ll help take you back to the
   moment.

   I’ve seen many people post their old photos and memories on Facebook,
   but most of them are irrelevant to most people who don’t know them.
   Posting old photos is like writing a memoir and almost ensures that
   they’ll remain in history forever.

Sure, those photos can breathe life into you just when you need it, but can
we really be inspired by others who didn’t even witness our personal
experiences?

   And why do we catch ourselves in our everyday lives thinking:
     * Remember that time when…?
     * Is it because part of us wants to relive those memories or the
       moments or the emotion associated with them?
     * What do you think is the reason for this phenomenon?

Some Childhood Memories Can Be Happy, Others Can Be Painful

   Sometimes we have a specific memory that comes back to mind, or we
   think about the past in general. Most people experience this at some
   point in their lives and it doesn’t mean you’re having a breakdown or a
   sign of a mental illness from your past. Everyone experiences it!

   Unless you have been traumatized during your childhood, don’t worry
   because you think about the past.

   Here’s an example: If you remember positively how you played with your
   sister as a child, and then you see a sister with her child or
   something like that, it can trigger childhood memories.

   You shouldn’t worry too much if you feel good and bad at the same time
   when you think about the past. It doesn’t mean you’re broken or have
   mental health if you feel more than one emotion about something that
   happened to you when you were young.

   If you’re having a hard time living in the present when you think about
   the past, it’s called nostalgia-which means “deep longing or
   homesickness for the past”-and is generally perceived as a positive or
   negative emotion. Or perhaps even bittersweet?

   For many people, thinking about their past and reminiscing is normal.
   It’s normal for us to remember or reminisce about old times and events
   from our past.

It’s Normal to Have Memories or Thoughts of the Past

   Some memories are more vivid than others, but that doesn’t tell you if
   you’re dwelling on them too much or too little!

   Memories can also be triggered by different things – perhaps a song, an
   object like jewelry, a smell, or even just being in an area you spent a
   lot of time in as a child.

   In these cases, the triggers act like memories of the past, causing you
   to think of old times.

Sometimes We Look for Answers

   There are always some answers that our past can give us. For example:

   Perhaps you’ve repeatedly experienced bad things in your life and don’t
   understand why, because you weren’t a fearful child, nor have you
   experienced complex trauma.

   But deep inside you feel that the answers may be coming from an old
   emotion like fear or phobia that you’ve been avoiding dealing with for
   far too long. In this case, you may find answers by going back to the
   past, but for some reason, your mind keeps taking you back there
   looking for answers.

   Another reason could be that you feel social anxiety related to the
   fact that you were anxious as a child when you were with others and
   never figured out what triggered your anxiety symptoms.

Childhood Trauma That Needs Attention

   There are some traumatic memories where maybe you should have been
   treated before you became a young adult (e.g. adolescent psychiatry)
   but couldn’t because of the situations, which can affect your life
   today.

   If thinking about the past brings back some painful memories of
   difficult experiences that happened a long time ago, you may not have
   to worry if you have the coping skill to deal with it in a healthy way.
   But if we’ve had intense experiences, such as child abuse, emotional
   abuse, or other types of childhood trauma, and you feel symptoms of
   depression, panic attacks, anxiety disorder, PTSD (post-traumatic
   stress disorder), obsessive-compulsive disorder, or symptoms of mental
   health issues, you should seek medical advice.

The Past Is a Real Thing

   The past is a real thing that really happened. The future is an
   illusion that hasn’t happened yet. There’s no time travel, no time
   machines, and no way to travel back and change the past.

   No matter how much we want to change the past, there’s nothing we can
   do about it. The future may be an illusion, but the past is a fact. Our
   actions have consequences, positive and negative. They’re real and
   they’re a direct result of what we’ve done in the past.

   The present moment exists only because of everything that’s happened up
   to this point. Without the past, there would be no present moment, no
   real now. That’s why it’s so important to look at the past objectively,
   without trying to justify or rewrite history.

The Past Doesn’t Just Disappear

   The past doesn’t just disappear. It’s the foundation of who we’re. We
   can’t erase it, but we can go into the future knowing that we survived
   difficult times in the past and will survive again.

We Cannot Control How Our Lives Began but We Can Control Our Present and Our
Future

   You may have been too young to make a difference then, but you can
   decide how your life will end up, at least from where you’re now. We
   have a choice, and as long as we have a choice, there’s hope. It’s the
   way we choose to think about the past that gives it power over us and
   helps us progress in life.

Nostalgia Is Helpful When It Leads Us to Be Grateful for What We’ve Achieved

   Thinking about the past is natural and can be helpful.

   Looking back on good memories and seeing how far we’ve come since then
   can help us appreciate and value what we have now, while motivating us
   to make progress in the future.

   For example, it can be fun to reminisce about all the things you loved
   as a child, like your favorite show on TV or your favorite toy. It can
   be a valuable reminder that there are still many things to love today –
   if you just look for them more often.

   Nostalgia can hold us back just as easily as it can propel us forward.
   When we spend time thinking about the past instead of planning for the
   future, our goals can fall by the wayside.

   We may feel that our current life isn’t good enough because it’s
   nothing like the past, which is never a productive way to look at
   things. Or we may start comparing ourselves to others based on their
   past successes rather than their current ones – and suddenly feel
   envious or inadequate.

   By understanding how our past built us, we can improve our lives and
   our attitudes.

When You’re Feeling Down, It Can Often Help to Look Back on Fond Memories

   Nostalgia is a form of self-care – a reminder that the past had its
   good points, too, and that there’s still plenty to look forward to.

   Take some time to think about what you treasured most when you were
   young. What were your favorite toys or books? What were your
   relationships with friends and family like? What about elementary
   school and high school?

   Then use the opportunity to reflect on how far you’ve come since then –
   and how far you hope to go.

It Might Even Motivate You to Make Progress on Your Current Goals!

   Nostalgia can also be a form of escapism, as it distracts us from our
   current problems or helps us avoid them.

   Nostalgia can also be a form of escapism, as it distracts us from our
   current problems or serves to help us avoid them. For example, you
   might avoid dealing with your marital problems by reminiscing about the
   good times you’d during your relationship and intentionally ignoring
   the current relationship problems.

   Since nostalgia can be used as a distraction to avoid certain problems,
   it’s important that we don’t abuse it and instead use it in a
   productive way. To accomplish this, let’s look at some common ways we
   can abuse nostalgia and how you can tell if you’re using nostalgia as a
   distraction.

Don’t Use Nostalgia to Run Away From Your Problems

   When people have unresolved issues in their relationships, they often
   use nostalgia as an excuse to avoid dealing with those issues.

   The problem is that while they’re stuck in the past, they aren’t making
   progress in resolving their current problems. They use the past as an
   excuse not to work on their problems.

   Nostalgia isn’t about “all or nothing” – you don’t have to think back
   only to the good or bad times. Instead, think about the good and bad
   things that happened in your life, and don’t try to see something
   through rose-colored glasses.

   When we use nostalgia as a form of escapism and avoid seeing both the
   good and the bad from our past, it can cause us to avoid dealing with
   our current problems and get stuck in the past.

   For example:

   If you’re having problems with your partner, a friend, or a family
   member, but instead of working on those problems, you spend all your
   time thinking about the past ups and downs of your relationship, that’s
   one way nostalgia can be used as an escape mechanism.

   You’re trying to escape from something negative in your life by
   focusing on the positive aspects of something else. While this is
   natural, it’s unhealthy when you overuse nostalgia to escape from
   things. If you find yourself doing this, try to figure out why you feel
   the need to escape what’s happening.

Childhood Memories Can Hold Important Information That Helps Us Navigate Our
Lives Now

   Just like a baby, our early childhood memories become imprinted on our
   memory. It may be the first time you saw snow or the day your parents
   told you about Santa Claus. These impressions can trigger positive or
   negative emotions that can affect how you function now.

It’s Also Common to Have Vivid Images From Our Childhood That May Not Be
Pleasant

   You may remember having to go to high school and being teased by your
   classmates, or being sent away by your parents for singing an innocent
   song in class. For some people, such memories can make them feel shy
   and insecure, so they distance themselves from others and cling to
   their former selves to protect themselves.

   It’s actually a great thing to look back on your childhood and
   especially if you’ve memories or thoughts of the past. After all,
   childhood memories can hold important information that helps us
   navigate our lives now.

   By learning from and questioning your childhood memories, you can begin
   to put things in perspective. It’s important to spend time looking back
   at your childhood so you can find your place in this life. When you
   know where you came from, you know where you’re now and how to get
   where you want to go.

   Through the process of remembering, we can begin to understand who
   we’re and why we act the way we do today. Through our experiences, we
   learn about ourselves and can look at our lives from a different
   perspective, putting things in perspective.

   For example, if we had strict parents, they may have instilled in us a
   fear of making mistakes.

   We can learn a lot from our childhood.

   For example, if our parents were strict, they may have instilled in us
   the fear of making mistakes. This can make us fearful of making
   decisions and hesitant when it comes to taking risks or trying new
   things in life. We feel like we’re not good enough and don’t know what
   the right decision is, so we hold back. This can have a negative impact
   on our lives because we can’t reach our full potential and it keeps us
   from doing what we really want to do.

   Another example: If one parent was very protective of us as young
   children, they may have made us feel like they didn’t believe we could
   take care of ourselves. This can make it hard for us to gain confidence
   when we become young adults. We may rely too much on others and lack
   self-confidence, making it hard for us to believe in ourselves and our
   abilities.

   We may think that we’re not capable of handling things on our own or
   that we’ll break something or ruin everything if left to our own
   devices. This can be a problem because it keeps us from doing things
   for ourselves and becoming more independent.

   It’s not always easy to identify the things that are holding you back,
   but once you do, you can find solutions to them.

   We remember the past so that we can learn and grow.

Remembering the Past Is an Important Part of Overcoming Problems

   The first reason is that remembering and feeling are important to
   understanding and coping with problems. You may notice that you tend to
   close yourself off emotionally when you realize that you’re getting
   close to your feelings about a difficult situation. If this is the case
   for you, you should take some time to reflect on these feelings,
   because they can provide important clues about what’s going on in your
   life.

   The second reason nostalgic thoughts help us cope is that we can use
   our memories of the past to guide our actions in the future.

   The third reason nostalgia helps us deal with our problems is that it
   allows us to avoid dealing with those very problems. For example, if
   you spend all your free time thinking about the good old days when you
   were a young adult instead of working to solve a problem that’s
   bothering you today, then nostalgia may play an unfavorable role in
   managing your emotions and stressors.

How remembering your youth can be usefulHow Remembering Your Youth Can Be
Useful to Your Future

   The past doesn’t just disappear into a black void when it’s over, or
   become irrelevant because it’s not “the present.” So if the past is
   important for all these reasons, why do we pretend it’s no longer
   important? Because we have a relationship with the past that’s complex
   and confusing.

   We think that our memories are an incorruptible reflection of events,
   but in reality, they’re distorted by our emotions and the context – the
   time and place in which they occurred. It’s easy to wonder how these
   memories can be useful when they change depending on where you’re and
   how you feel; they morph like little piles of play dough.

   But maybe that’s okay. Maybe there isn’t one right answer to the
   question “What happened?” but a whole spectrum of possibilities,
   depending on who you ask and when you ask them.

   Maybe remembering isn’t so much about recalling exact details as it’s
   about putting things in perspective, learning from what happened,
   developing better coping strategies, making plans for the future based
   on your past experiences – and finding meaning in the process.

Sometimes Our Memory Tricks Us

   Cognitive distortions are common. We, humans, are a strange species for
   many reasons, one of which is the way we remember and deal with our
   past. We can be willing to forget parts and moments from our lives that
   don’t fit into the story we build about ourselves and others. This can
   lead to a disconnect between what’s actually happening at the moment
   and what we think it’s in our minds.

   Lovers of nostalgia can wander through their own time capsules,
   reliving their favorite moments from their youth and longing for the
   life they could’ve lived had they not failed (or not failed so often).
   It’s okay to romanticize your past: No one in the present will judge
   you for it; only you’ll know if it’s a healthy way to cope with
   everyday life, or if it’s an excuse used by people who’ve nothing
   better to do. Even plants nowadays have time capsules that they use as
   a source of food in times of scarcity, reliving their pre-apocalypse
   lives

We Have a Selective Memory

   It’s always fascinated me how our memory selects the best or worst
   moments of our lives. We can remember in detail an embarrassing moment
   in high school or a wonderful party, but we can’t remember what we ate
   yesterday. This isn’t a mistake; it’s just how our memory works.

   Memory helps us survive, so it focuses on unusual events that might
   affect us positively or negatively, such as meeting a new person or
   avoiding danger. The problem with this process is that some memories
   are false and inaccurate, especially the most intense or traumatic
   memories.

How to Remember Parts of Your Youth That You’ve Forgotten

   Here are some ways you can trigger memories of your youth:

   Pictures: Look at old photos – No matter how hard or bad you’d it as a
   kid, looking at photos will remind you that it could’ve been worse,
   because we often tend to be photographed when things are at least okay,
   and you can be grateful for some of the positive parts of your past
   that you don’t remember.
     * Music: listen to music from your childhood. You’ll be surprised how
       much it clears your head. I remember when I lived back in France
       after ten years abroad. The supermarkets still played the old music
       tracks that took me back to the old days, even though I was pretty
       sure they must’ve changed by now. And sometimes I couldn’t imagine
       them, but I could feel like a teenager again for a moment.
     * Ask a family member: maybe they can fill in the missing memories
       you’ve forgotten over time. And if not, it’s always good for you to
       catch up! Just make sure you ask those you trust. For example, it’s
       very common for an embittered divorced parent to try to manipulate
       his or her child’s memory over the years in hopes of changing his
       or her child’s memory. Most of us have witnessed this at least once
       in our network or through stories we hear from friends. If you find
       yourself in such a situation, just ask a neutral person about your
       youth. In some situations, some people opt for professional
       hypnosis to help them remember the missing pieces of their puzzle,
       especially for those who have repressed memory.
     * Eat something you enjoyed as a child. When I was a kid, food played
       an important role in my life. I’m not talking about expensive
       restaurants or Michelin-starred chefs – we didn’t have that kind of
       money – but simple, home-cooked food or cake or hot chocolate meant
       the world to me and still does. Food can bring back a lot of
       memories. For example, when I make French crepes, it reminds me of
       beautiful moments in my childhood,
     * Take a meditation retreat. A meditation retreat can be an option if
       you want to remember old events and learn to clear your mind.
       Meditation can be a useful tool if you’re trying to retrieve
       forgotten memories of past events, friendships, and even
       relationships.
     * Write down everything you remember about your youth. We’re not
       suggesting that we keep a journal of our younger years, but writing
       can still refresh some of the memories we keep in the back of our
       minds until we need them again… which happens to be right now!

What Thinking About Your Youth Can Do to You

   Have you ever wondered why, despite your best efforts, you keep
   thinking about the past? If this sounds familiar, I can tell you why:
   because the past is alive in so many ways.

The Past Can Even Be a Good Thing if We Use It to Better Understand Our
Present Selves

   When we learn to look at the past in a healthy way, we have the
   opportunity to learn how to deal with difficult feelings and complex
   relationships. A strong sense of self can help us see how we’ve grown
   and the life we’ve built, but also where we still need to grow in areas
   like communication or problem-solving.

   More importantly, looking at our past experiences can help us see how
   they shaped us and prepare us for potential future challenges.

   Looking at our formative years from an adult perspective gives us the
   opportunity to learn from our mistakes (or poor decisions) and
   celebrate successes that prepared us for other areas of life – whether
   professional or personal.

Actions You Can Take From Remembering Your Youth

   As you reflect on your youth, you may feel the need to take action.

   For example, if you’re feeling particularly nostalgic for a particular
   friend or place from when you were a young person, contacting that
   friend or organizing a trip to your hometown might be just the thing to
   rekindle the feelings of your youth.

   Other activities might be more spontaneous or even risky. You may feel
   compelled to flee your current life and start over somewhere else. This
   might mean quitting your job and moving across the country, or being
   more adventurous in your daily life. Whatever you do, just make sure
   it’s not an escape from the responsibilities and stability (and maybe
   boredom) that adult life brings.

Life Is a Journey

   When I look back, I see that my life has been full of ups and downs
   since elementary school! When we look back on our childhood, most of us
   probably feel some degree of happy nostalgia and painful memories –
   memories of past childhood activities, friendships, or toys may put a
   smile on our face. Many people look back on their teenage years or the
   first few years after leaving home as the best days of their lives.

   For me, nostalgia is like time travel, and I enjoy the good times and
   the bad times like watching a movie.

My philosophy of life is that whatever happened before we’re not here to win
or experience the good only, but to learn.

   We can learn from both positive and negative memories, and every step
   in our learning process is a big win, much bigger than you might think!

Related Articles

   American Psychological Association – Speaking of Psychology: Does
   nostalgia have a psychological purpose?

   American Psychological Association – Memories of Childhood Abuse

   Child Mind Institute – What is obsessive-compulsive disorder?

   By Author Valerie Forgeard

   Posted on April 7, 2022

   Categories Self Improvement, Memory, Mind, Motivation, Purpose,
   Thinking
   Ezoic report this ad

Post navigation

   Describing Breathing in Creative Writing

   Naming Fictional Places
   Ezoic report this ad

Latest Posts

     * 100 Argumentative Essay Prompts
     * 125 Screenwriting Prompts to Help You Write Your Next Script
     * 25 Easter Bunny Writing Prompts for Kids
     * 13 Spooky Halloween Story Ideas to Terrify Your Readers
     * 10 Creative Pumpkin Writing Prompts for Kids

   Ezoic report this ad

     * Privacy Policy
     * Terms and Conditions
     * Cookie Policy

     * Affiliate Disclaimer
     * Copyright Notice
     * Help Center

     * Resources
     * Newsletter
     * Contact

   Copyright © 2020-2022 Brilliantio Ltd

   x
