   (BUTTON) Skip to main content

   IFRAME:
   https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-TFKV632&gtm_auth=NsJH3T
   s1-89I8lZURwQYmw&gtm_preview=env-1&gtm_cookies_win=x

   IFRAME:
   https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-N279F7B&gtm_auth=jfKETt
   lWamfZ4l02YiFCQw&gtm_preview=env-1&gtm_cookies_win=x

     * (BUTTON) Download Article
       Download Article
          + Download PDF
          + ReadCube
          + EPUB
          + XML (NLM)
       (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)
       Share on
          +
          +
          +
       (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)
       Export citation
          + EndNote
          + Reference Manager
          + Simple TEXT file
          + BibTex
       (BUTTON)

     * total views
     *

   View Article Impact

SHARE ON

     *
     *
     *
     *
     *

Edited by

Avihu Shoshana

   University of Haifa, Israel

Reviewed by

Piedade Lalanda

   University of the Azores, Portugal

Anouk Smeekes

   Utrecht University, Netherlands

TABLE OF CONTENTS

     *
          + Abstract
          + The Sociality of Nostalgia
          + National Nostalgia vs. Personal Nostalgia
          + National Nostalgia and Outgroup Threat
          + National Nostalgia and Outgroup Perceptions in the Context of
            Political Messaging
          + The Current Study
          + Hypotheses
          + Method
          + Results
          + Discussion
          + Data Availability Statement
          + Ethics Statement
          + Author Contributions
          + Conflict of Interest
          + Footnotes
          + References

     * (BUTTON) Export citation
          + EndNote
          + Reference Manager
          + Simple TEXT file
          + BibTex

   Check for updates

People also looked at

ORIGINAL RESEARCH article

   Front. Psychol., 14 April 2021
   Sec. Personality and Social Psychology
   https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.555667

Making America Great Again? National Nostalgia's Effect on Outgroup
Perceptions

   [24] Anna Maria C. Behler^1^*,
   [newprofile_default_profileimage_new.jpg] Athena Cairo^2, [24] Jeffrey
   D. Green^2 and [newprofile_default_profileimage_new.jpg] Calvin Hall^2
     * ^1Psychology Department, North Carolina State University, Raleigh,
       NC, United States
     * ^2Psychology Department, Virginia Commonwealth University,
       Richmond, VA, United States

   Nostalgia is a fond longing for the past that has been shown to
   increase feelings of meaning, social connectedness, and
   self-continuity. Although nostalgia for personal memories provides
   intra- and interpersonal benefits, there may be negative consequences
   of group-based nostalgia on the perception and acceptance of others.
   The presented research examined national nostalgia (a form of
   collective nostalgia), and its effects on group identification and
   political attitudes in the United States. In a sample of US voters (N =
   252), tendencies to feel personal and national nostalgia are associated
   with markedly different emotional and attitudinal profiles. Higher
   levels of national nostalgia predicted both positive attitudes toward
   President Trump and racial prejudice, though there was no evidence of
   such relationships with personal nostalgia. National nostalgia most
   strongly predicted positive attitudes toward president Trump among
   those high in racial prejudice. Furthermore, nostalgia's positive
   relationship with racial prejudice was partially mediated by perceived
   outgroup threat. Results from this study will help us better understand
   how the experience of national nostalgia can influence attitudes and
   motivate political behavior.

   Throughout Donald Trump's tumultuous presidential campaign and tenure,
   journalists and scholars sought to explain his appeal to many American
   voters. In the 2016 presidential election, as many as nine million
   voters who previously supported Barack Obama, the first Black
   president, voted for Trump despite his inflammatory race-focused
   rhetoric (Skelley, 2017). One concept repeatedly emerged within these
   discussions as a mainstay of Trump's political appeal: that of
   nostalgia, broadly defined as a bittersweet longing for the past.
   Evidence of Trump's appeals to an earlier time in American history have
   been cited from the beginning of the 2016 presidential campaign through
   his failed 2020 reelection campaign, ranging from the salient nostalgic
   reverie of the “Make America Great Again” campaign slogan (Samuelson,
   2016) to more coded political rhetoric promising White, working class
   Americans a return to times that have been lost (Brownstein, 2016).

   Some have hypothesized that such nostalgic rhetoric may capitalize on
   voters' latent feelings of threat to their economic welfare, or to the
   racial or cultural homogeneity of American culture (Brownstein, 2016;
   Smeekes et al., 2020). On a broad scale, nostalgia focused on
   nationality is a prominent feature of right-wing populist party
   rhetoric, and evidence from voters in the Netherlands suggests that the
   emphasis of stigmatizing outgroups and preserving cultural hegemony
   within nostalgic messaging is what explains the link between nostalgia
   and right-wing populist support (Smeekes et al., 2020). In the United
   States, several studies provide strong evidence of a link between
   support for Trump and group prejudice. For example, survey research has
   indicated that racial and anti-immigrant resentment strongly predicted
   voters' support of Trump in 2016, more so even than voter's feelings of
   economic threat (Hooghe and Dassonneville, 2018; Mutz, 2018; Schaffner
   et al., 2018). Additionally, a longitudinal analysis of police reports
   evidenced a significant increase in hate crimes reported in
   Trump-supporting counties in the 6 months following the 2016
   presidential election (Edwards and Rushin, 2018). However, no research
   has of yet established whether Trump's nostalgic rhetoric may be
   associated with voters' attitudes toward racial outgroups. To this end,
   in this paper, we present evidence that national nostalgia, an emotion
   distinct from personal nostalgia, is associated with increased
   prejudice as well as support for the populist messaging of Donald
   Trump.

The Sociality of Nostalgia

   Nostalgia is a mostly positive emotion that increases self-regard,
   attenuates self-esteem defense, enhances meaning in life, increases
   perceptions of self-continuity, and lessens feelings of existential
   threat (Wildschut et al., 2006; Routledge et al., 2008). Most people
   report experiencing nostalgia on a regular basis (Wildschut et al.,
   2006) and often structure their present in anticipation of experiencing
   nostalgia in the future (Cheung et al., 2020). Nostalgia is triggered
   in various ways, including by music, scents, and reflecting on past
   momentous events (Barrett et al., 2010; Reid et al., 2015; Sedikides et
   al., 2015b). This emotion also serves vital relational functions,
   increasing social connectedness and perceived social support (Sedikides
   et al., 2008).

   The social connectedness function of nostalgia is a primary avenue
   through which nostalgia confers positive psychological benefits.
   Although nostalgic memories are more likely to be evoked while
   experiencing negative affect (Wildschut et al., 2006) and loneliness
   (Zhou et al., 2008), the content of nostalgic memories evoked during
   these emotional states seem to act as a “repository” of positive
   affect, positive self-regard, and social connectedness (Sedikides et
   al., 2008, p. 306). The content of nostalgic memories is predominantly
   social, including recollections of close others, important social
   events, or tangible objects reminiscent of loved ones (Wildschut et
   al., 2006; Batcho et al., 2008). As a result of this, nostalgic
   memories seem to indirectly regulate these positive emotions by evoking
   and making more salient one's symbolic connections with others
   (Sedikides and Wildschut, 2019). For example, nostalgia felt in
   response to loneliness has been shown to reduce perceptions of
   isolation and low social support (Zhou et al., 2008). In organizational
   contexts, nostalgic emotions buffer the negative effects of low social
   support (due to procedural injustice) on reduced cooperation (van Dijke
   et al., 2015).

   Importantly, those who are more likely to experience nostalgia (i.e.,
   those high in personal nostalgia) are also more motivated to control
   prejudicial feelings and reduce their expression of prejudices against
   outgroups as a result of these positive benefits (Cheung et al., 2017).
   Four studies of Caucasian Americans examined the links between personal
   nostalgia and the expression of both blatant and more subtle prejudice
   toward African Americans (Cheung et al., 2017). They found that the
   link between personal nostalgia and prejudice reduction was mediated by
   feelings of empathy, suggesting that the experience of nostalgia offers
   advantages beyond the self.

National Nostalgia vs. Personal Nostalgia

   The link between nostalgia and sociality becomes more complex when
   considering nostalgia felt for one's group. Although nostalgia felt at
   the individual level confers both intra- and interpersonal benefits,
   group-based nostalgia appears to have a distinct psychological profile
   from personal nostalgia. Group-based emotions, as distinct from
   individual-level emotions, arise when individuals self-categorize with
   a social group and integrate the group into their sense of self (Seger
   et al., 2009). Furthermore, group-based emotions can differ markedly
   from their analogous individual level counterparts, such as when an
   individual might feel strong pride and happiness for their home team
   while not feeling strong pride in themselves (Smith and Mackie, 2016).
   Furthermore, group-based emotions serve a regulatory function of
   strengthening positive attitudes and behavioral intentions toward both
   their ingroup and threatening outgroups (Smith et al., 2007; Seate and
   Mastro, 2015).

   Group-based nostalgia—operationalized as nostalgia felt for events
   shared with one's ingroup, or collective nostalgia—can be experienced
   in a variety of social settings, including organizations, school
   classes (e.g., Class of 2021), cities, and nations (Wildschut et al.,
   2014; Smeekes, 2015; Green et al., 2021). Like individual-level
   nostalgia, shared memories can include notable events, such as a
   special performance (band or orchestra), graduation day, homecoming
   (college class), or sports championships (city). However, unlike
   individual-level nostalgia, group-based nostalgia can occur in the form
   of a longing for a past that individuals themselves did not experience,
   but rather one that was passed down through collective memory
   (Martinovic et al., 2017). Additionally, collective nostalgia has been
   shown to increase positive attitudes as well as an approach-oriented
   action tendency toward the ingroup relative to an individually
   experienced nostalgic memory (Wildschut et al., 2014, Study 1).
   Collective nostalgia also can increase group-oriented prosociality
   (e.g., willingness to volunteer or donate money to help the ingroup;
   Wildschut et al., 2014; Green et al., 2021). Collective self-esteem
   mediated this effect: recalling a collective nostalgic event increased
   collective self-esteem, which, in turn, increased intentions to
   volunteer. Other research has found additional ingroup benefits to
   collective nostalgia, such a preference for domestic (vs. foreign)
   consumer products (Dimitriadou et al., 2019) and a promotion of
   collective political action (in Hong Kong; Cheung et al., 2017).

   However, there are two sides to this coin. A preference for domestic
   products is also a bias against foreign products, and the promotion of
   collective political action was driven by anger and contempt for the
   outgroup (i.e., Hong Kong residents toward mainland Chinese; Cheung et
   al., 2017). Individuals who recalled a collective nostalgic memory (vs.
   an ordinary collective memory) were more willing to punish outgroup
   members who were unfair to an ingroup member (Wildschut et al., 2014,
   Study 3). However, in some cases, collective nostalgia might increase
   intergroup contact when individuals can feel collective nostalgia for a
   superordinate group (Martinovic et al., 2017). In a study of former
   Yugoslavians who had settled in Australia, Bosniaks, Croats, and Serbs
   who identified with Yugoslavia (when these groups were bound together
   prior to division and subsequent conflict) reported feeling more
   nostalgic for Yugoslavia and reported more contact with the ethnic
   groups that had resided in the former Yugoslavia (but not control
   ethnic groups).

   National nostalgia is one type of collective nostalgia that is felt
   while self-categorizing as a citizen of a specific country, and is
   likely to be associated with particular intra- and intergroup attitudes
   and behavioral intentions. Just as personal nostalgia during times of
   change and upheaval can facilitate coping (e.g., attenuating
   loneliness) (Zhou et al., 2008), national nostalgia—a reverie for a
   country's good old days—may increase felt closeness to fellow natives
   during times of national stress or uncertainty. However, nostalgic
   revelry at the national level may exclude other citizens, such as
   recent immigrants or minorities (Smeekes and Jetten, 2019). Studies of
   national nostalgia among Dutch participants indicated that national
   nostalgia predicted prejudice toward religious minorities in the
   country (Smeekes et al., 2014) as well as prejudice toward Muslim
   countries (Smeekes, 2015). Notably, these outgroup attitudes were not
   predicted by personal nostalgia, which has been shown to be associated
   with decreased intergroup prejudice (Cheung et al., 2017). This
   distinction between personal and national nostalgia may lie in the
   extent to which outgroups pose an emotional threat to the self.

National Nostalgia and Outgroup Threat

   The intergroup threat theory (Stephan et al., 1999) posits that
   intergroup prejudice and hostility is largely explained by perceptions
   of threats to one's ingroup by an outgroup. In line with this theory,
   substantial evidence has found that intergroup prejudice is strongly
   influenced by both realistic and symbolic threat perception (Stephan et
   al., 2002; Mutz, 2018). Realistic threats are perceived threats to
   one's actual well-being, and typically include the domains of physical
   safety, political power, and economic security. Symbolic threats are
   more abstract, dealing with the cultural norms, ideologies, values, and
   traditions of one's ingroup (Stephan and Stephan, 2000). Realistic
   threats tend to be elicited from groups that are more economically
   powerful, whereas symbolic threats come about from marginalized
   outgroups who are perceived as highly dissimilar, and thus often
   inferior, to an ingroup (Stephan et al., 1999). Though these constructs
   are distinct and examined separately in the literature, there often is
   overlap between them, especially considering the demographic, economic,
   and social dynamics of some ingroups and outgroups. To be specific,
   when a marginalized minority grows in political, economic, or
   representative power, realistic and symbolic threats can be conflated
   (Craig and Richeson, 2014).

   One salient factor in perceived threat for members of majority groups
   is the size of minority outgroups, with more threat being evoked by
   larger outgroups (Giles, 1977; Craig and Richeson, 2018) or even
   through messages endorsing diversity (Dover et al., 2016). In one
   notable set of studies by Craig and Richeson (2014), White American
   participants who read that the US population was becoming more diverse
   (relative to control conditions)—that the percentage of whites was
   dropping—reported more explicit (studies 1 and 3) and implicit (studies
   2a and 2b) prejudice toward non-White outgroups and pro-White
   attitudinal bias. One possible explanation on why national and personal
   nostalgia are associated with different intergroup attitudes may be due
   to different levels of social categorization evoked, leading to
   differing levels of perceived threat. Personal nostalgia, which is
   associated with continuity of personal identity (Sedikides et al.,
   2015a) and evokes strong feelings of social connectedness, also has
   downstream implications for reducing anxiety and hostility toward
   outgroup members (for a review, see Sedikides and Wildschut, 2019). In
   contrast, feeling national nostalgia is associated with
   self-categorizing at the group level, evoking one's national identity
   (Smeekes and Verkuyten, 2015). Similar to how personal nostalgia may be
   evoked when feeling disconnection at the individual level, national
   nostalgia has been shown to be evoked in response to existential
   concerns about one's group-based identity, and may have the beneficial
   effect of reducing anxiety by bolstering perceptions of group
   continuity and connection (Smeekes et al., 2018). For example, trait
   national nostalgia among Dutch participants was positively associated
   with wanting to protect national ingroup identity (Smeekes, 2015).
   Similarly, a cross-national survey across 27 countries found that
   existential concerns about the future of one's country predicted
   increased collective nostalgia, which in turn predicted greater ingroup
   belonging and anti-immigrant sentiment (Smeekes et al., 2018). However,
   when the presence or power of outgroups is salient (e.g., chronically
   or by the rhetoric of politicians), national nostalgia may increase
   perceived threat. Moreover, ingroup continuity may be threatened by
   consideration of outgroups (Smeekes et al., 2018). This may be
   particularly true for people whose views of the national past are
   distorted—for example, when whites in the United States feel a longing
   for a (whiter and more homogenized) past that never was. Thus, national
   nostalgia could increase this fear of the future, leading to increased
   prejudice.

   With the exception of a subsample of United States participants
   included in the cross-national study of Smeekes et al. (2018), this
   distinction has not been examined in the United States. Additionally,
   no studies have directly examined this theorized relationship in the
   context of political beliefs. Given that the tumultuous Trump years
   emphasized a number of political issues associated with national and
   ethnic identities, we extended this line of inquiry by examining
   whether perceived intergroup threat explains any found relationship
   between national nostalgia and endorsement of symbolic prejudice.

National Nostalgia and Outgroup Perceptions in the Context of Political
Messaging

   Recent work has highlighted the prominence of national nostalgia in the
   rhetoric of right-wing populist political parties, and in particular
   its role in posing racial or national outgroups as scapegoats for
   perceived economic or cultural decline (Mols and Jetten, 2014; Smeekes
   et al., 2020). Political leaders often utilize national nostalgia in
   rhetorical strategy by emphasizing the discontinuity between a nation's
   past and present (Mols and Jetten, 2014), which then serves to evoke
   collective angst about group status (Smeekes et al., 2018). A content
   analysis of speeches by right-wing populist leaders in Western Europe
   found consistent themes of nostalgia for their country's “glorious
   past” while denigrating the country's present, as well as themes
   emphasizing that a) opponents of the party were the cause of this
   discontinuity between past and present, and b) increasing the country's
   strength and opposition to party opponents would return the nation to
   its former glory (Mols and Jetten, 2014). By emphasizing collective
   identity discontinuity, and then highlighting a potential scapegoat to
   blame for that discontinuity, populist leaders offer listeners an
   outlet for restoring psychological well-being by denigrating the
   outgroups believed to be responsible (Smeekes et al., 2018). Indeed,
   national nostalgia has been shown to explain support for right-wing
   populist policies and leaders via the denigration of immigrant and
   racial outgroups (Smeekes et al., 2020).

   Similarly, the role of intergroup relations was a strong focus of
   Donald Trump's 2016 and 2020 presidential campaign rhetoric^1. In the
   2016 campaign, Trump borrowed Ronald Reagan's 1980 slogan, “Make
   America Great Again,” and emphasized claims that the United States had
   deteriorated from its former status. Along with these statements, he
   made numerous controversial statements on race, implying that changing
   demographics were, in part, to blame for this decline (Pettigrew,
   2017). This led political pundits to claim that Trump's supporters were
   primarily White Americans who felt threatened by changing racial
   demographics and nostalgic for a past, whiter version of the United
   States. Exit polls from the 2016 presidential election appeared to
   support some of these claims, as White voters were the only racial
   demographic to support Donald Trump over Hillary Clinton, doing so by a
   large margin of 20 percentage points (CNN, 2016)^2. Furthermore,
   several academic studies conducted in the wake of the 2016 election
   further supported the notion that intergroup attitudes played an
   important role in voters' choice to support Trump. Surveys conducted
   with representative panels found that support for Trump was most
   strongly predicted by negative attitudes toward the increased
   proportion of non-White US citizens in the population and
   anti-globalization attitudes (Hooghe and Dassonneville, 2018; Major et
   al., 2018; Mutz, 2018).

   To build upon this research, the aim of our study was to directly
   examine how voters' propensity to feel national nostalgia may explain
   support for Trump's populist rhetoric as well as increases in racial
   prejudice in the United States following the 2016 presidential election
   (Edwards and Rushin, 2018). Furthermore, we hoped to highlight the
   unique role of perceived realistic and symbolic threats in shaping US
   voters' political attitudes. We thought it appropriate to examine both
   realistic and symbolic threats given the unique role of Black Americans
   in United States history and the ever-evolving racial and ethnic
   demographics of the United States, of which White Americans are
   becoming less of a majority (US Census Bureau, 2020).

The Current Study

   We examined the role of national nostalgia in propagating intergroup
   racial hostility above and beyond political orientation. We explored
   how national nostalgia relates to political and racial attitudes among
   voters who participated in the 2016 US presidential election. We also
   examined the interplay between national nostalgia, pro-Trump attitudes,
   outgroup prejudice, and perceived outgroup threat.

   Although previous research examined survey data taken around the time
   of the 2016 presidential race (Hooghe and Dassonneville, 2018; Mutz,
   2018), our data were collected ~1 year after the election, allowing us
   to see how our participants felt after President Trump had been in
   office for some time, and whether the nostalgic message of “Making
   America Great Again” still resonated with voters. Minimal work on
   national nostalgia has been conducted, and to date, nearly all of this
   work has been conducted outside of the United States; thus, this
   research would explore the potential link between national nostalgia
   and political attitudes as well as study the phenomenon in the US
   sociopolitical landscape. In addition, we included a validated measure
   of personal nostalgia in order to better examine the association
   between personal and national nostalgia as well as to assess whether
   each type of nostalgia might be associated with political attitudes.

Hypotheses

   We tested one specific hypothesis and three exploratory research
   questions, which were pre-registered on Open Science Framework
   (https://osf.io/mwh6n).

   Hypothesis 1. National nostalgia would be positively related to
   pro-Trump attitudes (1a). No relationship was expected to be found
   between personal nostalgia and positive attitudes toward President
   Trump (1b).

   Research Question 1. Will White or Republican identity be positively
   related to pro-Trump attitudes?

   Research Question 2. Will national nostalgia be positively related to
   racial prejudice?

   Research Question 3. Will the relationship between national nostalgia
   and racial prejudice be mediated by increased threat sensitivity?

Method

Participants

   An a priori power analysis using G^*Power (Faul et al., 2009) indicated
   a minimum of 132 individuals would be needed to detect a small
   correlation of r = 0.09^3 with 95% power and α = 0.05. We recruited 252
   US citizens who voted in the 2016 presidential election and identified
   as either White or Black (57.9% female, and 54.4% White). Participant
   age ranged from 18 to 79 (M = 36.34, SD = 12.68). Regarding political
   affiliation, 44.0% of the participants identified as Democrats, 25.4%
   Independent, 23.4% Republican, and 7.2% as Other. Participants were
   recruited through Amazon MTurk (www.mturk.com) during the Fall of 2017
   and compensated $0.30 for completing the survey.

   Regarding our sample demographics, White individuals comprised
   approximately 74% of the electorate in the 2016 election (Pew Research
   Center, 2018); however, we purposefully oversampled Black voters for
   the purposes of achieving appropriate statistical power for our
   analyses. Additionally, Republicans comprised ~31% of the electorate,
   with Democrats and Independents making up 35 and 34%, respectively.
   Thus, we feel that our sample is an accurate reflection of the 2016 US
   voters.

Measures

Personal Nostalgia

   The Southampton Nostalgia Scale (SNS; Routledge et al., 2008) measured
   personal nostalgia, operationalized as how frequently participants
   experience nostalgia and how significant participants felt nostalgic
   experiences were to them. The scale included seven items (e.g., “How
   valuable is nostalgia for you?”) rated from 1 (Not at all) to 7 (Very
   much). To build on past national nostalgia research (Smeekes et al.,
   2014), we use a validated measure of personal nostalgia (proneness to
   feeling personal nostalgia).

National Nostalgia

   The National Nostalgia Scale (NNS; Smeekes et al., 2014, Study 1)
   measured participants' propensity to feel nostalgia on the basis of
   one's national ingroup membership. The scale included four items rated
   from 1 (Very rarely) to 5 (Very frequently) scale. The NNS used in this
   study was modified from the scale of Smeekes and Verkuyten (2015)^4 to
   reflect American nationality [e.g., “How often do you long for the
   America (Netherlands) of the past?”].

Positive Attitudes Toward Trump

   In terms of political attitudes, we wanted to assess positive sentiment
   toward the President as related to the experience of nostalgia.
   Therefore, we used a modified version of the State Functions of
   Nostalgia Scale (SFN; Hepper et al., 2012), which measures the extent
   to which nostalgia confers the positive benefits of social
   connectedness, well-being, self-regard, and overall positive affect.
   Each item was modified to assess how participants experienced these
   benefits as they related to Donald Trump's presidency. This scale
   consisted of 16 items (e.g., “Thinking about the election of Donald
   Trump makes me feel protected/happy/life is worth living”), that were
   rated on a 1 (Not at all) to 5 (Extremely) scale.

Outgroup Threat Perception

   The Realistic Threat Scale (RTS; Stephan et al., 2002) was employed to
   measure realistic threat perceptions (e.g., of social or economic harm)
   of Black individuals. The scale was examined only among White
   participants. The measure includes 12 items (e.g., “African Americans
   hold too many positions of power and responsibility in this country”)
   rated on a 1 (Strongly disagree) to 7 (Strongly agree) scale.

Racial Prejudice

   The Symbolic Racism Scale (SRS; Henry and Sears, 2002) was used to
   assess cognitive and affective dimensions of racial prejudice toward
   Black individuals. The measure consisted of eight items (e.g., “It's
   really a matter of some people not trying hard enough; if Blacks would
   only try harder they could be just as well off as Whites.”) rated on a
   1 (Strongly disagree) to 4 (Strongly agree) scale.

Political Measures

   Participants reported their political orientation on a scale ranging
   from 1 (Very Liberal) to 7 (Very Conservative). Participants also chose
   which political party they most strongly identified with (Democrat,
   Republican, Independent, or Other). Participants then indicated which
   political candidate they voted for in the 2016 presidential election
   (Hillary Clinton, Donald Trump, or Other). They then responded to the
   question “How much do you feel like we need to ‘Make America Great
   Again’?” on a 1 (Not at all) to 7 (Extremely) scale. Finally,
   participants reported their country of origin and whether English was
   their native language.

Ethnic Identity Salience

   The Multi-Ethnic Identity Measure—Revised (MEIM-R; Phinney and Ong,
   2007) was used to determine the centrality of participants'
   racial/ethnic backgrounds to their sense of self. The scale contains
   such as “I have a strong sense of belonging to my ethnic group,” and
   each item was rated on a scale of 1 (Strongly disagree) to 5 (Strongly
   agree) scale.

Demographics

   Participants last reported their gender, age, and racial identity.

Procedure

   Participants signed up through Amazon Mturk to complete an online
   survey about their attitudes toward the past, race, and politics. After
   indicating their informed consent, participants responded to all study
   measures and items in the order described above. All responses were
   collected over a single, 1 week period in the Fall of 2017 to avoid
   history artifacts in the data. Additionally, all participants passed
   attention checks ensuring that they were properly attending to
   questionnaire items. For the purposes of this survey, missing more than
   two attention check items indicated insufficient attention and
   warranted non-inclusion of that participant's data.

Results

   Descriptive statistics and zero-order correlations are displayed in
   Table 1. To test our hypotheses, we conducted a series of hierarchical
   linear regression models and bootstrapped mediation and moderation
   analyses to assess the relationship between nostalgia (national and
   personal) and political and intergroup attitudes using SPSS v. 20 and
   Hayes' PROCESS macro v.3 (Hayes, 2013). Following these baseline
   models, we also support our findings using path analyses employing
   maximum likelihood estimation using IBM AMOS v. 26 (Due to a computer
   error, the national nostalgia data from 72 participants were unusable,
   reducing the n for analyses including national nostalgia to 193, still
   above the target based on the power analysis).
   TABLE 1
   www.frontiersin.org

   Table 1. Descriptive statistics and bivariate correlations among study
   variables.

Main Hypothesis

   We first assessed whether national nostalgia and personal nostalgia
   would be related to pro-Trump attitudes in the ways previously
   predicted. National nostalgia and personal nostalgia proneness were
   entered simultaneously in step 2 of the model to identify their unique
   relationship with attitudes toward Trump. In step 1 of the hierarchical
   model, political orientation significantly predicted pro-Trump
   attitudes such that higher conservatism was associated with more
   positive attitudes of Trump, β = 0.59 t(192) = 10.08, p < 0.001. In
   step 2 of the model, national nostalgia was associated with more
   pro-Trump attitudes above and beyond political affiliation, β = 0.30,
   t(192) = 4.43, p < 0.001, supporting Hypothesis 1a. In contrast,
   personal nostalgia was not associated with pro-Trump attitudes above
   and beyond political orientation, β = −0.07, t(192) = −1.13, p = 0.259.
   Nostalgia predicted a significant proportion of variance in attitudes
   above and beyond political orientation, F[(2, 189)] = 9.90, p < 0.001,
   R^2Δ = 0.06.

   To examine this relationship in a consolidated path model^5, Figure 1
   displays Path Model 1, quantifying the relationship between national
   and personal nostalgia and race, political orientation, ethnic identity
   salience, and pro-Trump attitudes. The model fit the data somewhat
   weakly due to the lower sample size [χ2(1) = 23.01, p < 0.001; CFI =
   0.89; RMSEA = 0.34; SRMR = 0.03]. As shown in Model 1, Hypothesis 1 was
   again supported: national nostalgia predicted pro-Trump attitudes (β =
   0.24, p < 0.001), whereas personal nostalgia was unrelated to pro-Trump
   attitudes (β = −0.08, p = 0.156).
   FIGURE 1
   www.frontiersin.org

   Figure 1. Path analysis of relationships between national/personal
   nostalgia, ethnic identity, and pro-Trump attitudes (Model 1). Note.
   Path coefficients represent standardized estimates.

Research Question 1

   To assess whether there was an association between race, political
   affiliation, and pro-Trump attitudes, we ran a 2 (Racial
   Identification) × 3 (Political Party Affiliation) ANOVA. Racial
   identification was coded with 0 = White/European-American, 1 =
   Black/African-American (shortened to W/EA and B/AA going forward).
   Political party affiliation was coded as 1 = Republican, 2 = Democrat,
   and 3 = Independent and were analyzed using an indicator
   multicategorical contrast. For the purposes of this analysis, data from
   participants who did not identify with one of these three major
   political groups were excluded. The model included 59 Republicans (34
   W/EA, 25 B/AA), 111 Democrats (48 W/EA, 63 B/AA), and 64 Independents
   (44 W/EA, 24 B/AA). The factorial model found that political party
   affiliation was the only significant predictor of holding positive
   attitudes toward President Trump, F[(2, 228)] = 47.73, p < 0.001,
   partial η^2 = 0.30, with Republicans (M = 3.94, SD = 1.22) more in
   favor of the president than their Democratic (M = 2.06, SD = 1.26) or
   Independent (M = 2.27, SD = 1.06) counterparts. There was no main
   effect of participant race (Black or White) on attitudes toward the
   President, F[(1, 228)] = 0.47, p = 0.57, nor was there an interaction
   between political party affiliation and participant race, F[(2, 228)] =
   0.05, p = 0.96. Figure 2 displays these results.
   FIGURE 2
   www.frontiersin.org

   Figure 2. Relationship between political party affiliation and
   pro-Trump attitudes by racial identity. Note. Error bars represent 95%
   CIs around the mean for each subgroup.

   To explore these results further, we examined whether ethnic identity
   salience, rather than race itself, may be an important qualifying
   variable in explaining pro-Trump attitudes. We examined whether
   political party (dummy coded with Republican = 0 to compare against
   Democrats and Independents) interacted with race (dummy coded with W/EA
   = 0) to predict racial identity salience (measured by the MEIM) using
   Hayes' PROCESS macro v. 3.4 (model 1). We conducted a bootstrapped
   moderation analysis with 5,000 resamples, which indicated a significant
   higher-order interaction effect between political affiliation and race
   to predict ethnic identity salience, F[(2, 228)] = 3.23, p = 0.041,
   R^2Δ = 0.024. An analysis of the simple slope effects indicated that
   there was a stronger difference in ethnic identity salience among White
   participants compared with Black participants. White Republicans (M =
   3.47, SD = 0.92) reported that their racial identity was significantly
   more important to them than their White Democratic [M = 3.04, SD =
   0.91, b = −0.43, 95% CI = (−0.82, −0.04)] and Independent counterparts
   [M = 2.89, SD = 0.92, b = −0.59, 95% CI = (−0.98, −0.19)]; simple slope
   difference F[(2, 228)] = 4.49, p < 0.001. In contrast, no significant
   difference in racial identity salience was found among
   Black/African-American participants; simple slope difference F[(2,
   228)]= 0.63, p = 0.537. In fact, an analysis of the simple main effect
   of race among Republicans indicated that White Republicans felt their
   racial identity was equally as important to them as Black participants;
   M = 3.73, SD = 0.83, b = 0.24, 95% CI = (−0.16, 0.63). Black Democrats
   [b = 0.60, 95% CI = (0.37, 0.83)] and Black Independents (b = 0.97, 95%
   CI = (0.57, 1.36)] reported significantly higher ethnic identity
   salience compared with White Democrats and Independents (see Figure 3).
   FIGURE 3
   www.frontiersin.org

   Figure 3. Racial identity salience among Black/African-American and
   White/European-American participants of different political
   affiliations (Republican, Democrat, Independent). Note. Error bars
   represent 95% CIs around the mean for each subgroup.

   We also examined whether racial identity salience qualified the
   relationship between national nostalgia and pro-Trump attitudes. A
   moderation analysis using Hayes' PROCESS macro (model 1) indicated that
   higher racial identity salience somewhat strengthened the relationship
   between national nostalgia and positive attitudes toward Trump, but
   only among White participants; ΔR^2 = 0.03, F[(1, 77)] = 3.94, p =
   0.051. Among those low in racial identity salience, national nostalgia
   was unrelated to attitudes toward Trump; b = 0.27, 95% CI = (−0.03,
   0.58). Those moderate [b = 0.43, 95% CI = (0.18, 70)] and high [b =
   0.64, 95% CI = (0.31, 0.97)] in racial identity salience showed a
   strong relationship between national nostalgia and pro-Trump attitudes.

   As a final examination of Research Question 1, a second path model
   (Path Model 2, Figure 4) was compared with Path Model 1 to again
   examine the interaction between nostalgia and ethnic identity (on
   pro-Trump attitudes), and the interaction between political orientation
   and race (assessing its relationship with ethnic identity). When
   interpreting this model, it is important to note that path models are
   generally considered ineffective in examining interaction effects
   (Meyers et al., 2016). Path Model 2 showed much improved fit relative
   to Path Model 1 [χ2(10) = 40.47, p < 0.001, CFI = 0.95, RMSEA = 0.09^6;
   SRMR = 0.05]. Likely due to the limitations of path models to compute
   interaction effects, in contrast to what was shown in the PROCESS
   model, the interaction between race and political orientation (measured
   on a continuous scale) was not significantly associated with ethnic
   identity (β = −0.08, p = 0.210). Additionally, the interaction term
   between national nostalgia and ethnic identity was no longer associated
   with pro-Trump attitudes (β = 0.13, p = 0.607). This suggests that for
   White participants, greater national nostalgia was associated with
   increased ethnic identity.
   FIGURE 4
   www.frontiersin.org

   Figure 4. Path analysis estimating interaction effects (race ×
   political orientation and ethnic identity × nostalgia) on pro-Trump
   attitudes. Note. Path coefficients represent standardized estimates.

Research Question 2

   We next examined whether national nostalgia was positively related to
   racial prejudice. Bivariate correlations indicated that national
   nostalgia was positively associated with both anti-Black racial
   prejudice measured by the Symbolic Racism Scale (SRS) as well as
   perceived realistic threat measured by the Realistic Threat Scale (RTS,
   see Table 1). To further examine the link between national nostalgia
   and racial prejudice, we tested whether racial prejudice moderated the
   link between national nostalgia and positive attitudes toward President
   Trump using Hayes' PROCESS macro (model 1) with 5,000 resamples. A
   significant moderation effect was identified. Participants reporting
   higher prejudice exhibited a stronger relationship between national
   nostalgia and pro-Trump attitudes; ΔR^2 = 0.05, F[(1, 178)] = 19.60, p
   < 0.001. Simple slopes were calculated and visualized using the
   interActive online utility, and are presented in Figure 5 (McCabe et
   al., 2018). The relationship between national nostalgia and positive
   attitudes toward Trump was non-significant at low levels of prejudice
   (those at least −1 SD below the mean of SNS). However, for those
   moderate to high in racial prejudice (0, +1, or +2 SDs above the mean
   of SNS), national nostalgia positively predicted pro-Trump attitudes
   (see Figure 5). Interestingly, this effect was found separately for
   both White [ΔR^2 = 0.03, F[(1, 77)] = 5.93, p = 0.02] and Black
   participants [ΔR^2 = 0.09, F[(1, 97)] = 17.44, p < 0.001], but there
   was no significant three-way interaction between national nostalgia,
   prejudice, and race (p = 0.14), so the results in Figure 5 are
   displayed for all participants.
   FIGURE 5
   www.frontiersin.org

   Figure 5. Relationship between national nostalgia and pro-Trump
   attitudes moderated by anti-Black racial prejudice. Note. Plots display
   simple slopes at −2, −1, 0, +1, and +2 SDs away from the mean of racial
   prejudice for all participants. PTCL, percentile.

Research Question 3

   Will the relationship between national nostalgia and racial prejudice
   be mediated by increased threat sensitivity?

   We last examined whether the relationship between national nostalgia
   and racial prejudice would be mediated by outgroup threat perception
   (measured by the Realistic Threat Scale, RTS). A moderated mediation
   model was constructed using Hayes' PROCESS macro (model 8) to assess
   whether the proposed mediational effect might differ between
   European-American and African-American participants. As shown in Figure
   6, the model indicated a significant indirect effect of national
   nostalgia on prejudice through the mediator of perceived threat for
   both White/EA participants [β = 0.23, 95% CI = (0.12, 0.36)] and
   Black/AA participants [β = 0.22, 95% CI = (0.13, 0.32)]. The
   mediational indirect effect did not differ by participant race; β =
   0.07, 95% CI = (−0.15, 0.13).
   FIGURE 6
   www.frontiersin.org

   Figure 6. Mediation of national nostalgia relationship with racial
   prejudice by outgroup threat perception, moderated by participant race.

   To examine this question in the context of a path model, Path Model 3
   (Figure 7) displays the proposed relationships between national
   nostalgia and racial prejudice. Model 3 showed a moderate fit with the
   data, χ(2) = 65.80, p < 0.001; CFI = 0.79; RMSEA = 0.41; SRMR = 0.07).
   When accounting for political orientation, race, national nostalgia,
   personal nostalgia, racial threat sensitivity, and racial prejudice in
   a structural equation mediation model, national nostalgia directly
   predicted racial prejudice (β = 0.21, p < 0.001), whereas personal
   nostalgia did not (β = 0.03, p = 0.581). The relationship between
   national nostalgia and racial prejudice was significantly mediated by
   threat sensitivity [indirect effect β = 0.18, 95% bias-corrected CI
   (0.10, 0.26)]. Interestingly, personal nostalgia also showed a weak
   indirect effect on national nostalgia via threat sensitivity, but in a
   negative direction [indirect effect β = −0.07, 95% bias-corrected CI
   (−0.14, −0.01)]. This suggests that greater personal nostalgia may
   weakly predict lower racial prejudice via reduced racial threat
   sensitivity.
   FIGURE 7
   www.frontiersin.org

   Figure 7. Path analysis of relationships between national/personal
   nostalgia and prejudice, mediated by racial threat sensitivity (Model
   3). Note. Path coefficients represent standardized estimates. Indirect
   effect of national nostalgia on racial prejudice through racial threat
   sensitivity was significant [β = 0.18; 95% bias-corrected CI (0.10,
   0.26)].

Discussion

   In our study, national nostalgia was associated with more positive
   feelings about President Trump, as well as increased perceived racial
   threat among White respondents. In contrast, personal nostalgia was
   unrelated to support for Trump or perceived racial threat. When
   assessed in a path model, personal nostalgia was actually associated
   indirectly with lower anti-Black prejudice via decreased racial threat
   sensitivity. These findings align with evidence from samples outside
   the United States (e.g., Smeekes and Verkuyten, 2015; Smeekes et al.,
   2020) that personal and national nostalgia are distinct experiences
   with unique ramifications for intergroup attitudes and relations.
   Though our overall finding that national nostalgia predicted Trump
   support could reflect a strong semantic connection between Trump and
   its 2016 presidential campaign slogan, it also may point to the appeal
   of Trump's campaign—and its right wing, populist sentiments—among those
   initially prone to feeling national nostalgia. To better answer this
   question, our next analyses investigated more closely the relationship
   between national nostalgia and identity.

   Our first research question asked whether identity was associated with
   national nostalgia. We found partial evidence for this idea, as
   Republican participants expressed greater positive attitudes toward
   Trump. However, there was no evidence of a relationship between race
   and support for the President. At first glance, this finding does not
   align with media narratives and political polling suggesting that
   Trump's messaging appealed mostly to White voters. However, although
   race itself did not predict support for the President, racial identity
   salience moderated the link between national nostalgia and pro-Trump
   attitudes. White Republicans felt more strongly connected to their
   racial identity than Whites who identified as either Democrats or
   Independents. White Republicans also expressed significantly more
   positive feelings toward the President than other groups. In fact, they
   rated their racial identity as important as Black participants in our
   sample. This is notable, as it evidences further support for the
   influence of White identity on political attitudes (Schildkraut, 2015).
   As members of the majority group, White individuals typically are less
   likely to think of themselves in terms of race than people of color,
   for whom race is a more centralized component of their identity (Steck
   et al., 2003).

   This finding suggests that the perception of demographic changes and
   threats to the dominant ingroup in the United States may indeed have
   been a critical factor in voters' choice to support Trump. Some
   research suggests that, in the current political climate, White
   Americans may increasingly identify with their Whiteness, as a result
   of threat resulting from shifting racial demographics (Jardina, 2019).
   However, there is an issue of causality, as these correlational data
   could indicate that the perception of such a threat may increase the
   salience of one's racial identity. This threat may be perceived more
   strongly by those for whom a White racial identity was already a more
   central part of their self-concept. For instance, Schildkraut (2015)
   found that White Americans with higher White identity scores, along
   with heightened perception of discrimination against Whites and feeling
   a sense of linked fate with other White Americans, were substantially
   more likely to politically endorse a White candidate. This suggests
   that the threat to White identity, along with other related constructs,
   may influence political attitudes and may also offer an explanation on
   why leaders invoking national nostalgia may be so attractive to some
   individuals. This type of rhetoric typically emphasizes collective
   identity discontinuity in order to foment anxiety about the state of
   the country while simultaneously offering a restorative outlet by
   identifying racial outgroups as scapegoats.

   The role of intergroup attitudes was apparent when examining the
   relationship between national nostalgia and pro-Trump support. We found
   that national nostalgia significantly predicted racial prejudice and
   that this relationship was mediated by perceived outgroup threat.
   Interestingly, this mediational effect was found among both White/EA
   and Black/AA participants, although the lack of a significant
   interaction effect may have been due to lower power. Additionally, we
   found a stronger relationship between national nostalgia and pro-Trump
   attitudes among those who reported more prejudice toward Black
   individuals. These findings align with evidence that group emotions
   motivate intergroup attitudes and, in particular, outgroup derogation
   when outgroups are perceived to be a threat (Smith et al., 2007;
   Wildschut et al., 2014). In particular, these findings align with
   converging evidence that the content of collective nostalgia—what
   individuals perceive to be “the good old days” for their identity
   group—reflects salient sources of perceived threat (Wohl et al., 2020).
   This conceptual model, highlighting the content of collective
   nostalgia, also explains differences between the emotional outcomes of
   personal and national nostalgia. Whereas, personal nostalgia enhances
   feelings of belonging by evoking memories of positive intrapersonal
   experiences in the face of ostracism or loneliness, national nostalgia
   may enhance belongingness by evoking positive thoughts about the “good
   old days” when one's group was perceived to be higher in status or less
   threatened by outgroups. It is also possible that national nostalgia,
   like personal nostalgia, may enhance feelings of continuity in its own
   way, by allowing individuals to feel connected to a time in which they
   believed their ingroup identity was less threatened or somehow
   stronger. Recent work supports the notion that, analogous to personal
   nostalgia, enhancing feelings of self-continuity (Sedikides and
   Wildschut, 2019), national nostalgia is linked to feelings of ingroup
   continuity (Smeekes et al., 2018). A study across 27 countries found
   that national nostalgia was associated with stronger feelings of
   ingroup continuity (Smeekes et al., 2018); ingroup belonging but not
   prejudice (outgroup rejection) appeared to mediate this link. Since
   relatively little research on collective nostalgia, particularly
   national nostalgia, has been undertaken, future work should examine
   these questions via multiple methods, particularly longitudinal and
   experimental designs, which can identify whether and to what extent
   self-continuity is enhanced by (or itself predicts) collective
   nostalgia in response to outgroup threat.

Constraint on Generalizability

   These data were obtained from a cross-sectional group of US Mturk
   workers in the Fall of 2017, so these results are most generalizable to
   American middle-aged populations (Huff and Tingley, 2015).
   Additionally, these considerations of intergroup threat perception and
   prejudice are most generalizable to White/EA and Black/AA social groups
   within the United States, and future analysis of national nostalgia
   should continue to assess different ethnicities, races, and other
   relevant social categories.

Future Directions

   These findings raise the question on whether national nostalgia stems
   from a desire by some to go back in time, due to perceived group
   identity threats. Future research should employ longitudinal or
   experimental methods, such as manipulating identity threat, to examine
   whether national nostalgia arises as a defense against perceived
   threats to one's ingroup. Relatedly, it is only recently that national
   nostalgia has been manipulated (Smeekes and Verkuyten, 2015; Wohl et
   al., 2020), as the majority of national nostalgia research has been at
   the trait level. Further work evoking national nostalgia in
   experimental contexts would allow us to better understand how this
   emotion interacts with intergroup attitudes, prejudice, and feelings of
   threat. We should also continue to examine how the importance of racial
   identity, including white racial identity, plays a role in their
   political attitudes and actual voting behavior. The need for further
   research in this area has grown substantially in recent years,
   especially in light of events such as those that took place in
   Charlottesville in 2017 and at the US Capitol Building in early 2021,
   in which large groups of White Nationalists gathered in events that
   ultimately turned violent.

   An additional question to be explored is the extent to which national
   nostalgia operates within specific cultures and nations. Although
   Trump's presidential tenure has ended, the importance of these findings
   is not constrained only to the rhetoric from his campaign. Rather, the
   use of national nostalgia in political communication is widespread
   (Mols and Jetten, 2014; Smeekes et al., 2020) and has far-reaching
   implications. Future research should examine the role of national
   nostalgia in shaping attitudes toward demagogues in a variety of
   settings and when considering a variety of societal outcomes. Our
   findings suggest that national nostalgia may influence intergroup
   attitudes as a group-based emotion broadly through evoking positive
   emotions about one's national group identity. However, the nature of
   the construct suggests it may also operate through evoking shared
   historical knowledge and schemas about one's group within a specific
   nation. The phrase “make America great again” and other nostalgic
   political rhetoric is particularly controversial in the US because
   minority groups have achieved significant advances in civil rights in
   recent history, and a call to return to a former time may imply a call
   for a return to a former and less egalitarian social hierarchy. Future
   research on national nostalgia should explore the nuances of this
   emotion and its expression among various ethnic and social groups in
   different countries. Expressions of national nostalgia may evoke
   intergroup hostility to a lesser extent within nations with different
   histories.

   Future research might also examine the extent to which perceptions of
   outgroup threat stem from realistic (e.g., economic) vs. symbolic
   (e.g., social/moral) concerns. Prior research has theorized that
   symbolic threats (rather than realistic threats) may be more
   psychologically influential on voter support for right-wing populist
   ideology, as concerns about immigration and intergroup relations tend
   to emphasize the importance of preserving cultural homogeneity (Smeekes
   et al., 2020). Understanding the source and salience of perceived
   economic and cultural threats could help inform interventions to
   assuage anxiety, thus reducing prejudice toward outgroups. Finally,
   with the ever-evolving demographic makeup of the United States (as well
   as many other countries), further work in this area should include
   individuals who identify with other racial groups beyond White or
   Black, and should also be expanded to look at different identities such
   as gender, sexual orientation, religion, immigrant status, social
   class, education level, and nation of origin.

Coda

   National nostalgia, a form of collective nostalgic experience, is a
   promising lens through which to analyze attitudes, such as political
   and prejudicial attitudes, particularly when combined with assessments
   of identity salience and perceived outgroup threat. Research to date on
   national nostalgia is relatively new. Although this phenomenon has been
   studied elsewhere (mostly in European and Asian nations), this is the
   first study, to our knowledge, to examine the US political landscape.
   Personal nostalgia—a wistful longing for one's personal past—does not
   have the same associations with political and group attitudes, and only
   moderately correlates with national nostalgia. In contrast, national
   nostalgia, particularly in combination with white identity salience and
   outgroup threat perception, predicted both prejudice and political
   attitudes.

   There may be some irony in the possibility that national nostalgia may
   include beliefs for a past that never was; in this case, an America
   that was not as white as some recollect. Nevertheless, these national
   nostalgic feelings appear to be linked to important social attitudes,
   and thus are worthy of further investigation.

Data Availability Statement

   The datasets presented in this study can be found in online
   repositories. All reported study hypotheses, measures, and methods were
   preregistered through the Open Science Framework, available at
   https://osf.io/mwh6n. De-identified data and study information can be
   viewed at https://osf.io/6j4gm/. Some survey measures listed in the
   preregistration were not analyzed in this study and therefore not
   listed in this report.

Ethics Statement

   The studies involving human participants were reviewed and approved by
   Virginia Commonwealth University IRB. The patients/participants
   provided their written informed consent to participate in this study.

Author Contributions

   AB, AC, and CH compiled and submitted all documentation for IRB ethics
   review and OSF pre-registration. AB and AC oversaw data collection and
   analysis. AB wrote the first draft of the manuscript. All authors
   collectively contributed to the conception and design of the study and
   assisted with subsequent revisions.

Conflict of Interest

   The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of
   any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a
   potential conflict of interest.

Footnotes

   1. ^We note that intergroup relations were also a salient theme in the
   2020 election (e.g., the role of the Black Lives Matter movement);
   however, as our data were collected in 2017, we emphasize the 2016
   election in this paper.

   2. ^Though a majority of all non-White voters supported Hillary Clinton
   over Donald Trump, the exit polls showed that the greatest differential
   was among Black voters, who voted in Clinton's favor by a margin of 89
   to 8% (CNN, 2016). Thus, we chose to use Black voters as a comparison
   group to the Caucasian sample.

   3. ^The Pearson correlation between national nostalgia and outgroup
   prejudice reported by Smeekes and Verkuyten, 2015, study 2).

   4. ^The authors would like to note that this scale was not included in
   the original pre-registration, as it was published just prior to the
   time this study was developed. However, the decision was made prior to
   data collection to utilize this validated scale as a more direct and
   statistically sound way to measure the construct of national nostalgia.

   5. ^Although structural equation models are often used to model paths
   among composite variables (such as national and personal nostalgia), we
   opted to use a path model for these analyses given that our sample was
   not large enough to justify inclusion of all individual items in the
   model.

   6. ^Although RMSEA greater than 0.08 is often considered marginal fit,
   RMSEA has been known to become inflated with sample sizes lower than
   200 (Meyers et al., 2016).

References

   Barrett, F. S., Grimm, K. J., Robins, R. W., Wildschut, T., Sedikides,
   C., and Janata, P. (2010). Music-evoked nostalgia: affect, memory, and
   personality. Emotion 10, 390–403. doi: 10.1037/a0019006

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Batcho, K. I., DaRin, M. L., Nave, A. M., and Yaworsky, R. R. (2008).
   Nostalgia and identity in song lyrics. Psychol. Aesth. Creativ. Arts 2,
   236–244. doi: 10.1037/1931-3896.2.4.236

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Brownstein, R. (2016, June 2). Trump's rhetoric of White nostalgia. The
   Atlantic. Available online at:
   https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/06/trumps-rhetoric-of
   -white-nostalgia/485192/

   Google Scholar

   Cheung, W. Y., Hepper, E. G., Reid, C. A., Green, J. D., Wildschut, T.,
   and Sedikides, C. (2020). Anticipated nostalgia: looking forward to
   looking back. Cogn. Emot. 34, 511–525. doi:
   10.1080/02699931.2019.1649247

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Cheung, W. Y., Sedikides, C., and Wildschut, T. (2017). Nostalgia
   proneness and reduced prejudice. Pers. Individ. Dif. 109, 89–97. doi:
   10.1016/j.paid.2016.12.045

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   CNN (2016). Election 2016 Exit Polls. Retrieved from:
   https://edition.cnn.com/election/2016/results/exit-polls

   Google Scholar

   Craig, M. A., and Richeson, J. A. (2018). Majority no more? The
   influence of neighborhood racial diversity and salient national
   population changes on whites' perceptions of racial discrimination.
   RSF: the Russell Sage Foundation. J. Soc. Sci. 4, 141–157. doi:
   10.7758/rsf.2018.4.5.07

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Craig, M. A., and Richeson, J. A. (2014). More diverse yet less
   tolerant? How the increasingly-diverse racial landscape affects white
   Americans' racial attitudes. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 40, 750–761.
   doi: 10.1177/0146167214524993

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Dimitriadou, M., Maciejovsky, B., Wildschut, T., and Sedikides, C.
   (2019). Collective nostalgia and domestic country bias. J. Exp.
   Psychol. Appl. 25, 445–457. doi: 10.1037/xap0000209

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Dover, T. L., Major, B., and Kaiser, C. R. (2016). Members of
   high-status groups are threatened by pro-diversity organizational
   messages. J. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 62, 58–67. doi:
   10.1016/j.jesp.2015.10.006

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Edwards, G. S., and Rushin, S. (2018). The Effect of President Trump's
   Election on Hate Crimes. Social Science Research Network.

   Google Scholar

   Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Buchner, A., and Lang, A. G. (2009).
   Statistical power analyses using G^* Power 3.1: tests for correlation
   and regression analyses. Behav. Res. Methods 41, 1149–1160. doi:
   10.3758/BRM.41.4.1149

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Giles, M. W. (1977). Percent black and racial hostility: an old
   assumption reexamined. Soc. Sci. Q. 58, 412–417. doi:
   10.1177/104438947705800704

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Green, J. D., Cairo, A. H., Sedikides, S., and Wildschut. (2021). The
   ties that bind: university nostalgia fosters relational and collective
   university engagement. Front. Soc. Psychol. 11:580731. doi:
   10.3389/fpsyg.2020.580731

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Hayes, A. F. (2013). Introduction to Mediation, Moderation, and
   Conditional Process Analysis: A Regression-Based Approach. New York,
   NY: The Guilford Press.

   Google Scholar

   Henry, P. J., and Sears, D. O. (2002). The symbolic racism 2000 scale.
   Polit. Psychol. 23, 253–283. doi: 10.1111/0162-895X.00281

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Hepper, E. G., Ritchie, T. D., Sedikides, C., and Wildschut, T. (2012).
   Odyssey's end: Lay conceptions of nostalgia reflect its original
   Homeric meaning. Emotion 12, 102–119. doi: 10.1037/a0025167

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Hooghe, M., and Dassonneville, R. (2018). Explaining the trump vote:
   the effect of racist resentment and anti-immigrant sentiments. PS
   Political Sci. Politics 51, 528–534. doi: 10.1017/S1049096518000367

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Huff, C., and Tingley, D. (2015). “Who are these people?” Evaluating
   the demographic characteristics and political preferences of MTurk
   survey respondents. Res. Politics 2, 1–12. doi:
   10.1177/2053168015604648

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Jardina, A. (2019). White Identity Politics. New York, NY: Cambridge
   University Press.

   Google Scholar

   Major, B., Blodorn, A., and Blascovich, G. M. (2018). The threat of
   increasing diversity: why many White Americans support Trump in the
   2016 presidential election. Group Proc. Intergroup Relat. 21, 931–940.
   doi: 10.1177/1368430216677304

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Martinovic, B., Jetten, J., Smeekes, A., and Verkuyten, M. (2017).
   Collective memory of a dissolved country: group-based nostalgia and
   guilt assignment as predictors of interethnic relations between
   diaspora groups from former Yugoslavia. J. Soc. Political Psychol. 5,
   588–607. doi: 10.5964/jspp.v5i2.733

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   McCabe, C., Kim, D., and King, K. (2018). Improving present practices
   in the visual display of interactions. Adv. Methods Pract. Psychol.
   Sci. 1, 147–165. doi: 10.1177/2515245917746792

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Meyers, L. M., Garst, G., and Guarino, A. J. (2016). Applied
   Multivariate Research: Design and Interpretation. Thousand Oaks, CA:
   Sage.

   Google Scholar

   Mols, F., and Jetten, J. (2014). No guts, no glory: how framing the
   collective past paves the way for anti-immigrant sentiments. Int. J.
   Intercult. Relat. 43, 74–86. doi: 10.1016/j.ijintrel.2014.08.014

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Mutz, D. (2018). Status threat, not economic hardship, explains the
   2016 presidential vote. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 115, 4330–4339.
   doi: 10.1073/pnas.1718155115

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Pettigrew, T. F. (2017). Social psychological perspectives on Trump
   supporters. J. Soc. Political Psychol5, 107–116. doi:
   10.5964/jspp.v5i1.750

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Pew Research Center (2018). An Examination of the 2016 Electorate,
   Based on Validated Voters. Retrieved from:
   https://www.pewresearch.org/politics/2018/08/09/an-examination-of-the-2
   016-electorate-based-on-validated-voters/ (accessed August 02, 2020).

   Google Scholar

   Phinney, J. S., and Ong, A. D. (2007). Conceptualization and
   measurement of ethnic identity: current status and future directions.
   J. Couns. Psychol. 54, 271–281. doi: 10.1037/0022-0167.54.3.271

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Reid, C. A., Green, J. D., Wildschut, T., and Sedikides, C. (2015).
   Scent-evoked nostalgia. Memory 23, 157–166. doi:
   10.1080/09658211.2013.876048

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Routledge, C., Arndt, J., Sedikides, C., and Wildschut, T. (2008). A
   blast from the past: the terror management function of nostalgia. J.
   Exp. Soc. Psychol. 44, 132–140. doi: 10.1016/j.jesp.2006.11.001

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Samuelson, R. J. (2016). ‘Make America Great Again’ Is Not a Policy.
   It's an Exercise in Mass Psychology. Available online at:
   https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/make-america-great-again-is-not
   -a-policy-its-an-exercise-in-mass-psychology/2016/07/17/e316d5a2-4ab5-1
   1e6-bdb9-701687974517_story.html

   Google Scholar

   Schaffner, B. F., Macwilliams, M., and Nteta, T. (2018). Understanding
   White polarization in the 2016 vote for president: the sobering role of
   racism and sexism. Polit. Sci. Q. 133, 9–34. doi: 10.1002/polq.12737

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Schildkraut, D. J. (2015). “Does becoming American create a better
   American? How identity attachments and perceptions of discrimination
   affect trust and obligation,” in Fear, Anxiety, and National Identity,
   eds N. Foner and P. Simon (New York, NY: The Russell Sage Foundation).

   Google Scholar

   Seate, A. A., and Mastro, D. (2015). Media's influence on immigration
   attitudes: an intergroup threat theory approach. Commun. Monogr. 83,
   194–213. doi: 10.1080/03637751.2015.1068433

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Sedikides, C., and Wildschut, T. (2019). The sociality of personal and
   collective nostalgia. Eur. Rev. Soc. Psychol. 30, 123–173. doi:
   10.1080/10463283.2019.1630098

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Sedikides, C., Wildschut, T., Arndt, J., and Routledge, C. (2008).
   Nostalgia: past, present, and future. Curr. Dir. Psychol. Sci. 17,
   304–307. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8721.2008.00595.x

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Sedikides, C., Wildschut, T., Routledge, C., and Arndt, J. (2015a).
   Nostalgia counteracts self-discontinuity and restores self continuity.
   Eur. J. Soc. Psychol. 45, 52–61. doi: 10.1002/ejsp.2073

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Sedikides, C., Wildschut, T., Routledge, C., Arndt, J., Hepper, E. G.,
   and Zhou, X. (2015b). To nostalgize: mixing memory with affect and
   desire. Adv. Exp. Soc. Psychol. 51, 189–273. doi:
   10.1016/bs.aesp.2014.10.001

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Seger, C. R., Smith, E. R., and Mackie, D. M. (2009). Subtle activation
   of a social categorization triggers group-level emotions. J. Exp. Soc.
   Psychol. 45, 460–467. doi: 10.1016/j.jesp.2008.12.004

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Skelley, G. (2017). Just How Many Obama 2012-Trump 2016 Voters were
   there? Rasmussen Reports.

   Google Scholar

   Smeekes, A. (2015). National nostalgia: a group-based emotion that
   benefits the in-group but hampers intergroup relations. Int. J.
   Intercult. Relat. 49, 54–67. doi: 10.1016/j.ijintrel.2015.07.001

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Smeekes, A., and Jetten, J. (2019). Longing for one's home country:
   national nostalgia and acculturation among immigrants and natives. Int.
   J. Intercult. Relat. 69, 131–150. doi: 10.1016/j.ijintrel.2019.02.001

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Smeekes, A., Jetten, J., Verkuyten, M., Wohl, M. J., Jasinskaja-Lahti,
   I., Ariyanto, A., et al. (2018). Regaining in-group continuity in times
   of anxiety about the group's future. Soc. Psychol. 49, 311–329. doi:
   10.1027/1864-9335/a000350

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Smeekes, A., and Verkuyten, M. (2015). The presence of the past:
   identity continuity and group dynamics. Eur. Rev. Soc. Psychol. 26,
   162–202. doi: 10.1080/10463283.2015.1112653

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Smeekes, A., Verkuyten, M., and Martinovic, B. (2014). Longing for the
   country's good old days: national nostalgia, autochthony beliefs, and
   opposition to Muslim expressive rights. Br. J. Soc. Psychol. 54,
   561–580. doi: 10.1111/bjso.12097

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Smeekes, A., Wildschut, T., and Sedikides, C. (2020). Longing for the
   “good old days” of our country: national nostalgia as a new
   master-frame of populist radical-right parties. J. Theoret. Soc.
   Psychol. doi: 10.1002/jts5.78

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Smith, E. R., and Mackie, D. M. (2016). Representation and
   incorporation of close others' responses: the RICOR model of social
   influence. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Rev. 20, 311–331. doi:
   10.1177/1088868315598256

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Smith, E. R., Seger, C. R., and Mackie, D. M. (2007). Can emotions be
   truly group level? Evidence for four conceptual criteria. J. Pers. Soc.
   Psychol. 93, 431–446. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.93.3.431

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Steck, L. W., Heckert, D. M., and Heckert, D. A. (2003). The salience
   of racial identity among African-American and White students. Race Soc.
   6, 57–73. doi: 10.1016/j.racsoc.2004.09.005

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Stephan, W. G., Boniecki, K. A., Ybarra, O., Bettencourt, A., Ervin, K.
   S., Jackson, L. A., et al. (2002). The role of threats in the racial
   attitudes of Blacks and Whites. Pers. Soc. Psychol. Bull. 28,
   1242–1254. doi: 10.1177/01461672022812009

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Stephan, W. G., and Stephan, C. W. (2000). “An integrated threat theory
   of prejudice,” in Reducing Prejudice and Discrimination ed Oskamp, S.
   (Mahwah, NJ: Psychology Press), 23–45.

   PubMed Abstract | Google Scholar

   Stephan, W. G., Ybarra, O., and Bachman, G. (1999). Prejudice toward
   immigrants. J. Appl. Soc. Psychol. 29, 2221–2237. doi:
   10.1111/j.1559-1816.1999.tb00107.x

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   US Census Bureau (2020). Demographic Turning Points for the United
   States: Population Projections for 2020 to 2060. Retrieved from:
   https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2020/dem
   o/p25-1144.pdf

   Google Scholar

   van Dijke, M., Wildschut, T., Leunissen, J., and Sedikides, C. (2015).
   Nostalgia buffers the negative impact of low procedural justice on
   cooperation. Organ. Behav. Hum. Decis. Process. 127, 15–29. doi:
   10.1016/j.obhdp.2014.11.005

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Wildschut, T., Bruder, M., Robertson, S., van Tilburg, W. A. P., and
   Sedikides, C. (2014). Collective nostalgia: a group-level emotion that
   confers unique benefits on the group. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 107,
   844–863. doi: 10.1037/a0037760

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Wildschut, T., Sedikides, C., Arndt, J., and Routledge, C. (2006).
   Nostalgia: content, triggers, functions. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 91,
   975–993. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.91.5.975

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Wohl, M. J., Stefaniak, A., and Smeekes, A. (2020). Longing is in the
   memory of the beholder: collective nostalgia content determines the
   method members will support to make their group great again. J. Exp.
   Soc. Psychol. 91:104044. doi: 10.1016/j.jesp.2020.104044

   CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Zhou, X., Sedikides, C., Wildschut, T., and Gao, D. G. (2008).
   Counteracting loneliness: on the restorative function of nostalgia.
   Psychol. Sci. 19, 1023–1029. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02194.x

   PubMed Abstract | CrossRef Full Text | Google Scholar

   Keywords: national nostalgia, prejudice, intergroup relations, emotion,
   political differences

   Citation: Behler AMC, Cairo A, Green JD and Hall C (2021) Making
   America Great Again? National Nostalgia's Effect on Outgroup
   Perceptions. Front. Psychol. 12:555667. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2021.555667

   Received: 25 April 2020; Accepted: 05 March 2021;
   Published: 14 April 2021.

   Edited by:
   Avihu Shoshana, University of Haifa, Israel

   Reviewed by:
   Anouk Smeekes, Utrecht University, Netherlands
   Piedade Lalanda, University of the Azores, Portugal

   Copyright © 2021 Behler, Cairo, Green and Hall. This is an open-access
   article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
   License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums
   is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright
   owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal
   is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,
   distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with
   these terms.

   *Correspondence: Anna Maria C. Behler, acbehler@ncsu.edu

This article is part of the Research Topic

   Current Issues in Nostalgia Research
   View all 13 Articles

People also looked at

   Download
