   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-NX5LSK3

   Skip to main content
   The New Yorker
     * Newsletter

   To revisit this article, select My Account, then View saved stories
   (BUTTON) Close Alert
   Sign In
   Search
     * News
     * Books & Culture
     * Fiction & Poetry
     * Humor & Cartoons
     * Magazine
     * Puzzles & Games
     * Video
     * Podcasts
     * Archive
     * Goings On
     * Shop

   (BUTTON) Open Navigation Menu

   To revisit this article, visit My Profile, then View saved stories
   (BUTTON) Close Alert
   The New Yorker
   Science and Tech
     * Can Computers Learn Common Sense?
     * The Ocean’s Most Delicate Species
     * The Science of Puppies
     * Old Timber, New Climate Data

   Annals of Technology

Why a Great Wave of Nostalgia Is Sweeping Through China

   By Amanda R. Martinez
   May 30, 2013
     *
     *
     *
     *
     * Save this story for later.

     *
     *
     *
     *
     * Save this story for later.

   Why a Great Wave of Nostalgia Is Sweeping Through China

   At the No. 8 Hot Pot Restaurant in Beijing, a school bell rings at 5:30
   P.M. sharp. Diners sit at old-style wooden desks rather than tables.
   The menu is a multiple-choice test. Instead of waiters, there are class
   monitors, who respond to raised hands. Not everyone can eat here,
   though. The restaurant is designed exclusively for people born between
   1980 and 1989; I.D.s are checked at the door.

   “We don’t mean to exclude anyone,” said Yuan Bao, the owner, an affable
   thirty-two-year-old with long bangs, dressed in cargo pants and a
   T-shirt with a skull on it. It’s just that “we know we all have similar
   memories and experiences.” Yuan’s goal is to create a safe space where
   his patrons can recall a very specific era of childhood innocence. It
   appears to be working: when the tinny, saccharine strains of a classic
   children’s song came on the restaurant’s sound system, one
   twenty-five-year-old diner said that it made her want to cry.

   The classroom restaurant is part of a wave of nostalgia sweeping the
   generation of Chinese born between 1980 and 1989, known in China as
   baling hou, or “post-eighties.” In late 2010, in the eleven days after
   an online video featuring two young men performing Michael Jackson’s
   “Billie Jean” was posted, the forty-two-minute film was viewed more
   than seven million times, provoking an outpouring of comments from
   twenty and thirtysomethings who confessed to being moved to tears. The
   same generational cohort has also been flocking to the country’s few
   remaining state-run department stores, which predate China’s economic
   reform and which have been rendered all but extinct by Western-style
   malls. With their hodgepodge of merchandise, the stores bear a striking
   resemblance to America’s five-and-dimes—save for the faded Mao posters
   and the use of abaci to tally up orders—and are among the only places
   where young people can find guohuo, the state-produced consumer
   products they grew up with. Mrs. Zhang, an employee at the Youn’an
   department store in southwest Beijing, said that, when members of the
   post-eighties generation started showing up, a couple of years ago,
   they looked around and were transported back. As if on cue, a
   twenty-six-year-old man appeared. Reflecting on a cluster of tin cups,
   he said, “I used to play with these when I was little.”

   Such outbreaks of bittersweet sentiments are perhaps an expression of
   China’s strong interest in its own history, or attempts at maintaining
   a sense of cultural continuity—albeit a variant that favors one’s
   personal experience of the past. But recent psychological research on
   the cognitive function of nostalgia suggests that the cause of this
   wave could be the post-eighties’ contemporary social experience.

   A number of studies have revealed that when we suffer from certain
   psychological ailments—loneliness, social isolation, self-doubt,
   negative mood, and the feeling that life is meaningless—nostalgia can
   act as a coping mechanism. Such ailments can cause the mind to sift
   through its cache of memories, summoning up those with a particular
   narrative signature. Researchers analyzed hundreds of nostalgic
   accounts, and found that they typically featured family and friends, a
   momentous event, or, often, both. The participant describing the memory
   was almost always the protagonist, and the narrative arc was generally
   one of redemption: at first, conditions may have seemed grim or
   hopeless, but eventually things were resolved in a favorable ending.
   Through nostalgia, the researchers claimed, we bring back to the
   surface evidence of past triumphs and close relationships, times when
   our lives felt safe and ordered. Clay Routledge, a psychologist and
   nostalgia researcher at North Dakota State University, explained,
   “You’re affirming the self—’I’ve done great things’—which is presumably
   predictive of the future. ‘I might be uncertain right now, but just
   look at my past. I’m a likeable person. I’m destined for great things.’
   ”

   To illuminate nostalgia’s role as an emotional buffer, Routledge and
   other researchers attempted to destabilize their subjects’ sense of
   self. Participants took tests that could be collectively characterized
   as psychologically diabolical: performing math in public, reading an
   essay designed to provoke existential angst, and being told that their
   answers on a personality survey indicated they would likely end up
   alone and unloved. In some of the experiments, the subjects who’d been
   made to feel insignificant or destined for abandonment reported feeling
   significantly more nostalgic than those who hadn’t. In other studies,
   participants were prompted to evoke either a nostalgic memory or an
   ordinary event, before or just after having their sense of self
   assailed. The subjects who indulged in a nostalgic reminiscence
   reported feeling significantly less stressed, less defensive, more
   socially supported and content, and more optimistic than their
   non-nostalgic counterparts.

   That nostalgia could be a source of mental resilience and motivation
   directly challenges certain critics’ notion of the sentiment as
   paralyzing, a harbinger of cultural stagnation. “It’s exactly the
   opposite,” Constantine Sedikides, a psychologist and nostalgia expert
   at the University of Southampton, said. “When you become nostalgic, you
   don’t become past-oriented. You want to go out there and do things.”

   If there is a poster population for nostalgia’s self-regulatory
   effects, it is China’s post-eighties cohort. As the nation’s first
   generation of only children—China instituted its one-child policy in
   1979—the post-eighties are predisposed to loneliness. They came of age
   in tandem with China’s transition to a more market-based economy, a
   fateful stroke of timing through which they were enlisted as
   involuntary trailblazers, tasked with defining what it means to be both
   modern and Chinese. While their parents received state-appointed
   factory jobs and government-subsidized housing, they were encouraged to
   pursue their dreams amidst a fluctuating social structure with few
   defined paths. Studying hard and making top grades became a
   generational cornerstone; academic diligence, it was understood, would
   lead to a more fulfilling professional life, and greater wealth. But
   the emphasis on education has produced more university graduates than
   positions with which to employ them. (A 2011 survey cited unemployment
   among college degree-holders aged twenty-one to twenty-five at just
   over sixteen per cent. Nearly seven million new graduates are expected
   this year.)

   Now in their late twenties or early thirties, the post-eighties are
   trying to navigate a desolate job market, often as the sole financial
   providers for both their children and their parents (as is China’s
   custom). Many left their rural hometowns for the more prosperous cities
   only to face vicious competition for scarce white-collar jobs. To vie
   for scant promotions, they work eleven-hour days and engage in brutal
   office politics. Housing costs are out of reach for most, with the
   real-estate price-to-income ratio in cities like Shanghai and Beijing
   as high as twenty-three to one, yet post-eighties men are under
   tremendous pressure to own a home before they propose marriage. Add to
   all of this urban overcrowding, unprecedented pollution, and a barrage
   of food-safety scandals (in the last six months alone, there have been
   rumors of anthrax in beef, rat meat sold as lamb, chicken laced with
   unsafe levels of antibiotics, thousands of dead pigs found in a river
   that supplies Shanghai’s water, and the discovery that the country’s
   bottled water may be as bad or worse than its tap water), and the
   resulting stress presents an onslaught of nostalgia’s known
   psychological triggers. Xinyue Zhou, a psychologist at Sun Yat-sen
   University, in Guangzhou, whose research has demonstrated nostalgia’s
   ability to bolster a sense of social connectedness among a diverse
   cross-section of Chinese citizens, said, “The uncertainty, the lack of
   control over our lives, is most unbearable to the post-eighties, so we
   have to seek confirmation from the past.”

   Marketers have been eager to capitalize on the post-eighties’ newly
   materialistic longing: Chevrolet and Hewlett-Packard launched nostalgic
   campaigns in recent years, while national brands, such as Huili Warrior
   sneakers, Forever bikes, and Jianlibao soda, have taken the opportunity
   to revive old products. According to Mary Bergstrom, the founder of the
   Bergstrom Group, a Shanghai-based consulting firm, and the author of
   “All Eyes East: Lessons from the Front Lines of Marketing to China’s
   Youth,” the most successful nostalgic ads and goods don’t just offer
   temporary relief within a safe moment of the past, they are also
   relevant to the post-eighties’ present reality and their hope for the
   future—a detail that underscores researchers’ findings that nostalgia
   can mitigate psychological slights and promote optimism.

   China’s young adults aren’t the only ones reeling from the country’s
   dramatic social shifts. Rampant health and safety issues, as well as
   the general transition from a more community-focussed culture to one
   that values individual wealth, have people of all ages yearning for a
   simpler, more trustworthy time. But the post-eighties, as the first
   generation to come of age in a China with global consumerism, popular
   culture, and technology, have, by far, the most universal cultural
   references through which to express their nostalgia. An emblematic
   example is the generation’s rekindled obsession with Transformers, a
   toy line and cartoon, introduced in 1984, about robots that morph into
   powerful machines in pursuit of good or evil. In July, 2007, the
   American film “The Transformers” opened in China, becoming the
   country’s second-highest-grossing foreign film at the time, and
   sparking a resurgence in the toy’s popularity.

   Back at the classroom restaurant in Beijing, a Transformers robot was
   featured prominently on a shelf strewn with colorful eighties-era toys.
   At a nearby table-desk, twenty-nine-year-old Jing Liu was laughing over
   beers with some of her actual former classmates. “Coming here makes us
   feel like we are back at the age when we didn’t have any pressure on
   us, just happily going to school every day,” she said. Just then, the
   staff handed out copies of an instantly recognizable first-grade
   English primer, and a young man volunteered to read aloud. A hush fell
   over his fellow diners, who turned to the appropriate page to follow
   along.

   Amanda R. Martinez, a science journalist and playwright, is writing a
   book on the global phenomenon of nostalgia.

   Photograph by CQSB/ChinaFotoPress/Getty

   More:ElementsNostalgiatechpages

The Daily

   The best of The New Yorker, every day, in your in-box, plus occasional
   alerts when we publish major stories.
   E-mail address
   ____________________
   (BUTTON) Sign up

   By signing up, you agree to our User Agreement and Privacy Policy &
   Cookie Statement.
   Read More
   Mazoltuv Borukhova and Mikhail Mallayev in Queens Supreme Court
   a-reporter-at-large
   Iphigenia in Forest Hills
   Anatomy of a murder trial.

   By Janet Malcolm
   Lyndon Johnson and John F. Kennedy walking out of a hotel
   annals-of-history
   The Day L.B.J. Took Charge
   Lyndon Johnson and the events in Dallas.

   By Robert A. Caro
   Painting of a woman wearing a red shirt
   a-reporter-at-large
   A Loaded Gun
   A mass shooter’s tragic past.

   By Patrick Radden Keefe
   Twenty-seven years after a friend’s murder, Andy Rosenzweig found
   himself revisiting the scene of the crime.
   annals-of-crime
   A Cold Case
   Suddenly, a New York cop remembered a long-ago murder.

   By Philip Gourevitch

   The New Yorker

   (BUTTON) Sections
     * News
     * Books & Culture
     * Fiction & Poetry
     * Humor & Cartoons
     * Magazine
     * Crossword
     * Video
     * Podcasts
     * Archive
     * Goings On

   (BUTTON) More
     * Customer Care
     * Shop The New Yorker
     * Buy Covers and Cartoons
     * Condé Nast Store
     * Digital Access
     * Newsletters
     * Jigsaw Puzzle
     * RSS

     * About
     * Careers
     * Contact
     * F.A.Q.
     * Media Kit
     * Press
     * Accessibility Help
     * Condé Nast Spotlight

   © 2022 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Use of this site constitutes
   acceptance of our User Agreement and Privacy Policy and Cookie
   Statement and Your California Privacy Rights. The New Yorker may earn a
   portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as
   part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this
   site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or
   otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
   Ad Choices
     *
     *
     *
     *
     *

   (BUTTON) Do Not Sell My Personal Info
