   #alternate What Is Nostalgia Good For? Quite a Bit, Research Shows

   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON) Sections
   (BUTTON) SEARCH
   Skip to contentSkip to site index
   Science

   Today’s Paper

   Science|What Is Nostalgia Good For? Quite a Bit, Research Shows
   https://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/09/science/what-is-nostalgia-good-for-q
   uite-a-bit-research-shows.html
     * (BUTTON) Give this articleGive this articleGive this article
     * (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)
     * +

   Advertisement
   Continue reading the main story

   Supported by
   Continue reading the main story

What Is Nostalgia Good For? Quite a Bit, Research Shows

     * Send any friend a story
       As a subscriber, you have 10 gift articles to give each month.
       Anyone can read what you share.
       (BUTTON)
       (BUTTON) Give this articleGive this articleGive this article
     * (BUTTON)
     * (BUTTON)
     * +

   Video
   (BUTTON)

   transcript
   (BUTTON)
   Back
   (BUTTON)
   0:00/4:34
   -0:00

   transcript

Science of Nostalgia

It was first thought to be a “neurological disease of essentially demonic
cause,” but it turns out that nostalgia is good for your brain. And there’s
science to prove it.

          N/A

   Video player loading

   It was first thought to be a “neurological disease of essentially
   demonic cause,” but it turns out that nostalgia is good for your brain.
   And there’s science to prove it.

   By John Tierney
     * July 8, 2013

   See how this article appeared when it was originally published on
   NYTimes.com.

   SOUTHAMPTON, England — Not long after moving to the University of
   Southampton, Constantine Sedikides had lunch with a colleague in the
   psychology department and described some unusual symptoms he’d been
   feeling. A few times a week, he was suddenly hit with nostalgia for his
   previous home at the University of North Carolina: memories of old
   friends, Tar Heel basketball games, fried okra, the sweet smells of
   autumn in Chapel Hill.

   His colleague, a clinical psychologist, made an immediate diagnosis. He
   must be depressed. Why else live in the past? Nostalgia had been
   considered a disorder ever since the term was coined by a 17th-century
   Swiss physician who attributed soldiers’ mental and physical maladies
   to their longing to return home — nostos in Greek, and the accompanying
   pain, algos.

   But Dr. Sedikides didn’t want to return to any home — not to Chapel
   Hill, not to his native Greece — and he insisted to his lunch companion
   that he wasn’t in pain.

   “I told him I did live my life forward, but sometimes I couldn’t help
   thinking about the past, and it was rewarding,” he says. “Nostalgia
   made me feel that my life had roots and continuity. It made me feel
   good about myself and my relationships. It provided a texture to my
   life and gave me strength to move forward.”

   The colleague remained skeptical, but ultimately Dr. Sedikides
   prevailed. That lunch in 1999 inspired him to pioneer a field that
   today includes dozens of researchers around the world using tools
   developed at his social-psychology laboratory, including a
   questionnaire called the Southampton Nostalgia Scale. After a decade of
   study, nostalgia isn’t what it used to be — it’s looking a lot better.

   Nostalgia has been shown to counteract loneliness, boredom and anxiety.
   It makes people more generous to strangers and more tolerant of
   outsiders. Couples feel closer and look happier when they’re sharing
   nostalgic memories. On cold days, or in cold rooms, people use
   nostalgia to literally feel warmer.

   Nostalgia does have its painful side — it’s a bittersweet emotion — but
   the net effect is to make life seem more meaningful and death less
   frightening. When people speak wistfully of the past, they typically
   become more optimistic and inspired about the future.

   “Nostalgia makes us a bit more human,” Dr. Sedikides says. He considers
   the first great nostalgist to be Odysseus, an itinerant who used
   memories of his family and home to get through hard times, but Dr.
   Sedikides emphasizes that nostalgia is not the same as homesickness.
   It’s not just for those away from home, and it’s not a sickness,
   despite its historical reputation.

   Nostalgia was originally described as a “neurological disease of
   essentially demonic cause” by Johannes Hoffer, the Swiss doctor who
   coined the term in 1688. Military physicians speculated that its
   prevalence among Swiss mercenaries abroad was due to earlier damage to
   the soldiers’ ear drums and brain cells by the unremitting clanging of
   cowbells in the Alps.

   A Universal Feeling

   In the 19th and 20th centuries nostalgia was variously classified as an
   “immigrant psychosis,” a form of “melancholia” and a “mentally
   repressive compulsive disorder” among other pathologies. But when Dr.
   Sedikides, Tim Wildschut and other psychologists at Southampton began
   studying nostalgia, they found it to be common around the world,
   including in children as young as 7 (who look back fondly on birthdays
   and vacations).

   “The defining features of nostalgia in England are also the defining
   features in Africa and South America,” Dr. Wildschut says. The topics
   are universal — reminiscences about friends and family members,
   holidays, weddings, songs, sunsets, lakes. The stories tend to feature
   the self as the protagonist surrounded by close friends.

   Most people report experiencing nostalgia at least once a week, and
   nearly half experience it three or four times a week. These reported
   bouts are often touched off by negative events and feelings of
   loneliness, but people say the “nostalgizing” — researchers distinguish
   it from reminiscing — helps them feel better.

   To test these effects in the laboratory, researchers at Southampton
   induced negative moods by having people read about a deadly disaster
   and take a personality test that supposedly revealed them to be
   exceptionally lonely. Sure enough, the people depressed about the
   disaster victims or worried about being lonely became more likely to
   wax nostalgic. And the strategy worked: They subsequently felt less
   depressed and less lonely.

   Nostalgic stories aren’t simple exercises in cheeriness, though. The
   memories aren’t all happy, and even the joys are mixed with a wistful
   sense of loss. But on the whole, the positive elements greatly
   outnumber the negative elements, as the Southampton researchers found
   by methodically analyzing stories collected in the laboratory as well
   as in a magazine named Nostalgia.

   “Nostalgic stories often start badly, with some kind of problem, but
   then they tend to end well, thanks to help from someone close to you,”
   Dr. Sedikides says. “So you end up with a stronger feeling of belonging
   and affiliation, and you become more generous toward others.”

   A quick way to induce nostalgia is through music, which has become a
   favorite tool of researchers. In an experiment in the Netherlands, Ad
   J. J. M. Vingerhoets of Tilburg University and colleagues found that
   listening to songs made people feel not only nostalgic but also warmer
   physically.

   Image
   [09JPNOST-articleLarge.jpg?quality=75&amp;auto=webp&amp;disable=upscale
   ]
   Credit...Jasper James/Getty Images

   That warm glow was investigated in southern China by Xinyue Zhou of Sun
   Yat-Sen University. By tracking students over the course of a month,
   she and colleagues found that feelings of nostalgia were more common on
   cold days. The researchers also found that people in a cool room (68
   degrees Fahrenheit) were more likely to nostalgize than people in
   warmer rooms.

   Not everyone in the cool room turned nostalgic during the experiment,
   but the ones who did reported feeling warmer. That mind-body link, Dr.
   Wildschut says, means that nostalgia might have had evolutionary value
   to our ancestors long before Odysseus.

   “If you can recruit a memory to maintain physiological comfort, at
   least subjectively, that could be an amazing and complex adaptation,”
   he says. “It could contribute to survival by making you look for food
   and shelter that much longer.”

   Finding a Sweet Spot

   Of course, memories can also be depressing. Some researchers in the
   1970s and ’80s suggested that nostalgia could worsen a problem that
   psychologists call self-discontinuity, which is nicely defined in
   “Suite: Judy Blue Eyes,” by Stephen Stills: “Don’t let the past remind
   us of what we are not now.” This sense of loss and dislocation has
   repeatedly been linked to both physical and mental ills.

   But the feeling of discontinuity doesn’t seem to be a typical result of
   nostalgia, according to recent studies. In fact, people tend to have a
   healthier sense of self-continuity if they nostalgize more frequently,
   as measured on the scale developed at Southampton. To understand why
   these memories seem reassuring, Clay Routledge of North Dakota State
   University and other psychologists conducted a series of experiments
   with English, Dutch and American adults.

   First, the experimenters induced nostalgia by playing hit songs from
   the past for some people and letting them read lyrics to their favorite
   songs. Afterward, these people were more likely than a control group to
   say that they felt “loved” and that “life is worth living.”

   Then the researchers tested the effect in the other direction by trying
   to induce existential angst. They subjected some people to an essay by
   a supposed Oxford philosopher who wrote that life is meaningless
   because any single person’s contribution to the world is “paltry,
   pathetic and pointless.” Readers of the essay became more likely to
   nostalgize, presumably to ward off Sartrean despair.

   Moreover, when some people were induced to nostalgia before reading the
   bleak essay, they were less likely to be convinced by it. The brief
   stroll down memory lane apparently made life seem worthwhile, at least
   to the English students in that experiment. (Whether it would work with
   gloomy French intellectuals remains to be determined.)

   “Nostalgia serves a crucial existential function,” Dr. Routledge says.
   “It brings to mind cherished experiences that assure us we are valued
   people who have meaningful lives. Some of our research shows that
   people who regularly engage in nostalgia are better at coping with
   concerns about death.”

   Feeding the Memory Bank

   The usefulness of nostalgia seems to vary with age, according to Erica
   Hepper, a psychologist at the University of Surrey in England. She and
   her colleagues have found that nostalgia levels tend to be high among
   young adults, then dip in middle age and rise again during old age.

   “Nostalgia helps us deal with transitions,” Dr. Hepper says. “The young
   adults are just moving away from home and or starting their first jobs,
   so they fall back on memories of family Christmases, pets and friends
   in school.”

   Dr. Sedikides, now 54, still enjoys nostalgizing about Chapel Hill,
   although his range has expanded greatly over the past decade. He says
   that the years of research have inspired strategies for increasing
   nostalgia in his own life. One is to create more moments that will be
   memorable.

   “I don’t miss an opportunity to build nostalgic-to-be memories,” he
   says. “We call this anticipatory nostalgia and have even started a line
   of relevant research.”

   Another strategy is to draw on his “nostalgic repository” when he needs
   a psychological lift or some extra motivation. At such moments, he
   tries to focus on the memories and savor them without comparing them
   with anything else.

   “Many other people,” he explains, “have defined nostalgia as comparing
   the past with the present and saying, implicitly, that the past was
   better — ‘Those were the days.’ But that may not be the best way for
   most people to nostalgize. The comparison will not benefit, say, the
   elderly in a nursing home who don’t see their future as bright. But if
   they focus on the past in an existential way — ‘What has my life
   meant?’ — then they can potentially benefit.”

   This comparison-free nostalgizing is being taught to first-year college
   students as part of a study testing its value for people in difficult
   situations. Other experiments are using the same technique in people in
   nursing homes, women recovering from cancer surgery, and prison
   inmates.

   Is there anyone who shouldn’t be indulging in nostalgia? People who are
   leery of intimate relationships — “avoidant,” in psychological jargon —
   seem to reap relatively small benefits from nostalgia compared with
   people who crave closeness. And there are undoubtedly neurotics who
   overdo it. But for most others, Dr. Sedikides recommends regular
   exercises.

   “If you’re not neurotic or avoidant, I think you’ll benefit by
   nostalgizing two or maybe three times a week,” he says. “Experience it
   as a prized possession. When Humphrey Bogart says, ‘We’ll always have
   Paris,’ that’s nostalgia for you. We have it, and nobody can take it
   away from us. It’s our diamond.”

   Advertisement
   Continue reading the main story

Site Information Navigation

     * © 2022 The New York Times Company

     * NYTCo
     * Contact Us
     * Accessibility
     * Work with us
     * Advertise
     * T Brand Studio
     * Your Ad Choices
     * Privacy Policy
     * Terms of Service
     * Terms of Sale
     * Site Map
     * Canada
     * International
     * Help
     * Subscriptions

   IFRAME:
   https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-P528B3&gtm_auth=tfAzqo1
   rYDLgYhmTnSjPqw&gtm_preview=env-130&gtm_cookies_win=x
